The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Judge. Let me suggest to my colleagues that so people can plan when
they will be questioning, we would have this first round of ques­tioning at 30 minutes apiece and we would go in the same order as
with the opening statements, and then make a judgment as we go,
Judge, as to—we should have a break somewhere in here, and after
several rounds we will break briefly to give everyone an opportunity to stretch their legs, and if at any point you would like to break,
you let me know. Judge BORK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Let me begin. I want to begin to try to understand better and lay out your record in this round of questioning
that I have. I want to talk a little bit about what you have said and
what you believe about the role of the courts and what that role is
in society, and as you said, your judicial philosophy. Judge Bork, I am sure you know the one question to be raised in
these hearings is whether or not you are going to vote to overturn
Supreme Court decisions, which is obviously your right as a Supreme Court Justice, if you are confirmed. In 1981 in testimony before the Congress, you said "there are
dozens of cases" in which the Supreme Court made a wrong decision. This January, in remarks before the Federalist Society, you
implied that you would have no problem in overruling decisions
based on a philosophy or a rationale that you rejected. In an interview with the District Lawyer magazine in 1985, you
were asked if you could identify cases that you think should be reconsidered. You said, and I again quote, "Yes, I can but I won't." Would you be willing for this committee to identify the "dozens
of cases" that you think should be reconsidered? Judge BORK. Mr. Chairman, to do that I am afraid I would have to go out and start back through the casebooks again to pick out
the ones.
I do not know how many should be reconsidered. I can discuss
with you the grounds upon, the way in which I would reconsider
them. Let me mention that Federalist Society talk which was given
from scribbled notes. I had some notes, but I scribbled something in
the margin which I got up and said in response to another speaker.
It was that a non-originalist decision—by which I mean a decision
which does not relate to a principle or value the ratifiers enacted
in the Constitution—could be overruled. If you look at the next paragraph of that talk, which was a written out part and not the extemporized part, it contradicts that
statement. The very next paragraph states that the enormous expansion of the commerce power, Congress' power under the commerce clause of the Constitution, is settled, and it is simply too late
to go back and reconsider that, even though it appears to be much
broader than anything the framers or the ratifiers intended.
So there is, in fact, a recognition on my part that stare decisis or
the theory of precedent is important. In fact, I would say to you
that anybody who believes in original intention as the means of interpreting the Constitution has to have a theory of precedent, because this Nation has grown in ways that do not comport with the
intentions of the people who wrote the Constitution—the commerce clause is one example—and it is simply too late to go back and tear
that up.
I cite to you the Legal Tender cases. These are extreme examples
admittedly. Scholarship suggests that the framers intended to prohibit paper money. Any judge who today thought he would go back
to the original intent really ought to be accompanied by a guardian
rather than be sitting on a bench. The CHAIRMAN. I could not agree with you more, Judge, but when you and I had our brief discussion a month or so ago, a similar question was raised by me or by you—I cannot recall who—and
you pointed out that you cite the commerce clause and the legal
tender decisions as examples. Can you give us any other examples of the numerous decisions
you have criticized that might fall in that category of being settled
doctrine now and would cause such upheaval to change? Because
you know there have been many decisions you have criticized that
have been decided from 1942 on after the commerce clause. Judge BORK. I can, Senator. I think maybe it would be easier—I
have criticized some. Let me say this: I am a judge and I am acutely aware that my authority, unlike yours, arises only if I can explain why what I am doing is rooted in the Constitution or in a
statute. The cases I criticized, and I have criticized a lot in my
time, but then law is an intellectual enterprise and it grows from
argument back and forth and criticism, strong criticism. The CHAIRMAN. I am not criticizing your right to criticize. Judge BORK. All right. I criticized these cases on the basis of the
reasoning or lack of reasoning that the courts offered. For example,
the case that has come up and was mentioned, I think, in your
opening statement, Shelley v. Kraemer. Shelley v. Kraemer was a
case decided under the 14th amendment. The 14th amendment, as
we all know, applies only when government acts, when government
coerces and denies equal protection of the laws or due process. That was a racial covenant, restrictive racial covenant case, and
the Court held that when a State court enforced that contract, that
was action by the government; and, hence, the 14th amendment applied to private action. I have never been for racially restrictive covenants. I argued in
the Supreme Court that racially discriminatory private contracts
were covered by Section 1981, a famous post-Civil War enactment,
and outlawed as such by that statute. That was Runyon v. McCrary.
The CHAIRMAN. What year was the statute, Judge? Do you know? Judge BORK. NO, I do not offhand. The CHAIRMAN. Did it ante-date the Shelley case? Judge BORK. Oh, yes. But it just had not been applied. It was a
post-Civil War statute.
The difficulty with Shelley was not that it struck down a racial
covenant, which I would be delighted to see happen, but that it
adopted a principle which, if generally adopted, would turn almost
all private action into action to be judged by the Constitution.
Let me give you an example. If people at a dinner party get into
a political argument, and the guest refuses to leave when asked to
do so by the host, and finally the host calls the police to have the
unwanted guest ejected, under Shelley v. Kraemer that would become State action, and the guest could raise the first amendment. His first amendment rights would have been violated because a private person got sick of his political diatribe and asked him to leave and the police assisted him.
In that way, any contract action, any tort action, any kind of action can be turned into a constitutional case. Now, I am not alone in criticizing Shelley v. Kraemer. I think I have here Profes­sor Herbert Wechsler who has criticized it. Professor Tribe has said that, "to contemporary commentators . . . Shelley and another case appear as highly controversial decisions. In neither case, the critical consensus has it, is the Court's finding of State action Government coercion supported by any reasoning which would suggest that the 'State action' doctrine is a meaningful requirement rather than an empty formality."
There have been some suggestions that my constitutional philos­ophy or my reasoning about these cases is in some sense eccentric.
It is not in the least bit. All of these cases have been criticized. In fact, Shelley v. Kraemer has never been applied again. It has had no generative force. It has not proved to be a precedent. As such, it is not a case to be reconsidered. It did what it did; it adopted a principle which the Court has never adopted again. And while I criticized the case at the time, it is not a case worth reconsidering.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, let's talk about another case. Let's talk about the Griswold case. Now, while you were living in Connecticut, that State had a law—I know you know this, but for the
record—that it made it a crime for anyone, even a married couple,
to use birth control. You indicated that you thought that law was
"nutty," to use your words and I quite agree. Nevertheless, Connecticut, under that "nutty" law, prosecuted and convicted a doctor and the case finally reached the Supreme Court.
The Court said that the law violated a married couple's constitu­tional right to privacy. You criticized this opinion in numerous articles and speeches, beginning in 1971 and as recently as July 26th
of this year. In your 1971 article, "Neutral Principles and Some
First Amendment Problems," you said that the right of married
couples to have sexual relations without fear of unwanted children
is no more worthy of constitutional protection by the courts than the right of public utilities to be free of pollution control laws.
You argued that the utility company's right or gratification, I think you referred to it, to make money and the married couple's
right or gratification to have sexual relations without fear of unwanted children, as "the cases are identical." Now, I am trying to
understand this. It appears to me that you are saying that the government has as much right to control a married couple's decision
about choosing to have a child or not, as that government has a
right to control the public utility's right to pollute the air. Am I misstating your rationale here?
Judge BORK. With due respect, Mr. Chairman, I think you are. I was making the point that where the Constitution does not speak—
there is no provision in the Constitution that applies to the case—
then a judge may not say, I place a higher value upon a marital
relationship than I do upon an economic freedom. Only if the Constitution gives him some reasoning. Once the judge begins to say
economic rights are more important than marital rights or vice
versa, and if there is nothing in the Constitution, the judge is en­forcing his own moral values, which I have objected to. Now, on the Griswold case itself
The CHAIRMAN. Can we stick with that point a minute to make sure I understand it?
Judge BORK. Sure.
The CHAIRMAN. SO that you suggest that unless the Constitution, I believe in the past you used the phrase, textually identifies, a value that is worthy of being protected, then competing values in society, the competing value of a public utility, in the example you used, to go out and make money—that economic right has no more or less constitutional protection than the right of a married couple to use or not use birth control in their bedroom. Is that what you are saying?
Judge BORK. NO, I am not entirely, but I will straighten it out. I was objecting to the way Justice Douglas, in that opinion, Griswold
v. Connecticut, derived this right. It may be possible to derive an objection to an anti-contraceptive statute in some other way. I do not know.
But starting from the assumption, which is an assumption for purposes of my argument, not a proven fact, starting from the as­sumption that there is nothing in the Constitution, in any legiti­mate method of constitutional reasoning about either subject, all I am saying is that the judge has no way to prefer one to the other and the matter should be left to the legislatures who will then decide which competing gratification, or freedom, should be placed higher.
The CHAIRMAN. Then I think I do understand it, that is, that the economic gratification of a utility company is as worthy of as much protection as the sexual gratification of a married couple, because neither is mentioned in the Constitution.
Judge BORK. All that means is that the judge may not choose.
The CHAIRMAN. Who does?
Judge BORK. The legislature.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, that is my point, so it is not a constitution­al right. I am not trying to be picky here. Clearly, I do not want to get into a debate with a professor, but it seems to me that what you are saying is what I said and that is, that the Constitution—if it were a constitutional right, if the Constitution said anywhere in it, in your view, that a married couple's right to engage in the deci­sion of having a child or not having a child was a constitutionally-protected right of privacy, then you would rule that that right exists. You would not leave it to a legislative body no matter what they did.
Judge BORK. That is right. The CHAIRMAN. But you argue, as I understand it, that no such right exists.
Judge BORK. NO, Senator, that is what I tried to clarify. I argued that the way in which this unstructured, undefined right of privacy that Justice Douglas elaborated, that the way he did it did not prove its existence.
The CHAIRMAN. YOU have been a professor now for years and years, everybody has pointed out and I have observed, you are one of the most well-read and scholarly people to come before this committee. In all your short life, have you come up with any other way
to protect a married couple, under the Constitution, against an
action by a government telling them what they can or cannot do
about birth control in their bedroom? Is there any constitutional
right, anywhere in the Constitution? Judge BORK. I have never engaged in that exercise. What I was doing was criticizing a doctrine the Supreme Court was creating
which was capable of being applied in unknown ways in the future,
in unprincipled ways. Let me say something about Griswold v. Connecticut. Connecticut never tried to prosecute any married couple
for the use of contraceptives. That statute was used entirely
through an aiding and abetting clause in the general criminal code
to prosecute birth control clinics that advertised. That is what it
was about. The CHAIRMAN. But, in fact, they did prosecute a doctor, didn't they, for giving advice? Judge BORK. Well, I was at Yale when that case was framed by
Yale professors. That was not a case of Connecticut going out and
doing anything. What happened was some Yale professors sued to
have that—because they like this kind of litigation—to have that
statute declared unconstitutional. It got up to the Supreme Court
under the name of Poe v. Ullman. The Supreme Court refused to
take the case because there was no showing that anybody ever got
prosecuted. They went back down and engaged in enormous efforts to get
somebody prosecuted and the thing was really a test case on an abstract principle, I must say. The CHAIRMAN. Well, let me say it another way then, without doing it in case. Does a State legislative body, or any legislative
body, have a right to pass a law telling a married couple, or anyone
else, that behind—let's stick with the married couple for a
minute—behind their bedroom door, telling them they can or
cannot use birth control? Does the majority have the right to tell a
couple that they cannot use birth control? Judge BORK. There is always a rationality standard in the law,
Senator. I do not know what rationale the State would offer or
what challenge the married couple would make. I have never decided that case. If it ever comes before me, I will have to decide it. All
I have done was point out that the right of privacy, as defined or
undefined by Justice Douglas, was a free-floating right that was
not derived in a principled fashion from constitutional materials.
That is all I have done. The CHAIRMAN. Judge, I agree with the rationale offered in the
case. Let me just read it to you and it went like this. I happen to
agree with it. It said, in part, "would we allow the police to search
the sacred precincts of marital bedrooms for telltale signs of contraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to the notions of privacy
surrounding the marriage relationship. We deal with the right of
privacy older than the Bill of Rights. Marriage is a coming together for better or worse, hopefully enduring, and intimate to the
degree of being sacred. The association promotes a way of life, not
causes. A harmony of living, not political face. A bilateral loyalty,
not a commercial or social projects."
Obviously, that Justice believes that the Constitution protects
married couples, anyone.
Judge BORK. I could agree with almost every—I think I could
agree with every word you read but that is not, with respect, Mr.
Chairman, the rationale of the case. That is the rhetoric at the end
of the case. What I objected to was the way in which this right of
privacy was created and that was simply this. Justice Douglas observed, quite correctly, that a number of provisions of the Bill of
Rights protect aspects of privacy and indeed they do and indeed
they should. But he went on from there to say that since a number of the provisions did that and since they had emanations, by which I think
he meant buffer zones to protect the basic right, he would find a
penumbra which created a new right of privacy that existed where
no provision of the Constitution applied, so that he The CHAIRMAN. What about the ninth amendment? Judge BORK. Wait, let me finish with Justice Douglas. The CHAIRMAN. All right. Judge BORK. He did not rest on the ninth amendment. That was
Justice Goldberg. The CHAIRMAN. Right. That is what I was talking about. Judge BORK. Yes. And I want to discuss first Justice Douglas and
then I would be glad to discuss Justice Goldberg. The CHAIRMAN. OK. Judge BORK. NOW you see, in that way, he could have observed,
equally well, the various provisions of the Constitution protect individual freedom and therefore, generalized a general right of freedom that would apply where no provision of the Constitution did.
That is exactly what Justice Hugo Black criticized in dissent in
that case, in some heated terms—and Justice Potter Stewart also
dissented in that case. So, in observing that Griswold v. Connecticut does not sustain its
burden, the judge's burden of showing that the right comes from
constitutional materials, I am by no means alone. A lot of people,
including Justices, have criticized that decision. The CHAIRMAN. I am not suggesting whether you are alone or in
the majority. I am just trying to find out where you are. As I hear
you, you do not believe that there is a general right of privacy that
is in the Constitution. Judge BORK. Not one derived in that fashion. There may be other
arguments and I do not want to pass upon those. The CHAIRMAN. Have you ever thought of any? Have you ever
written about any? Judge BORK. Yes, as a matter of fact, Senator, I taught a seminar
with Professor Bickel starting in about 1963 or 1964. We taught a
seminar called Constitutional Theory. I was then all in favor of
Griswold v. Connecticut. I thought that was a great way to reason.
I tried to build a course around that, only I said: we can call it a
general right of freedom, and let's then take the various provisions
of the Constitution, treat them the way a lawyer treats common
law cases, extract a more general principle and apply that.
I did that for about 6 or 7 years, and Bickel fought me every step
of the way; said it was not possible. At the end of 6 or 7 years, I
decided he was right.
The CHAIRMAN. Judge, let's go on. There have been a number of
cases that flow from the progeny of the Griswold case, all relying
on Griswold, the majority view, with different rationales offered,
that there is a right of privacy in the Constitution, a general right
of privacy, a right of privacy derived from the due process, from
the 14th amendment, a right of privacy, to use the Douglas word—
the penumbra, which you criticize, and a right Goldberg suggested
in the Griswold case, from the ninth amendment. It seems to me, if
you cannot find a rationale for the decision of the Griswold case, then all the succeeding cases are up for grabs.
Judge BORK. I have never tried to find a rationale and I have not been offered one. Maybe somebody would offer me one. I do not know if the other cases are up for grabs or not.
The CHAIRMAN. Wouldn't they have to be if they are based on the same rationale? Judge BORK. Well, it may be that—I have written that some of
these cases were wrongly decided, in my opinion. For some of them
I can think of rationales that would make them correctly decided
but wrongly reasoned. There may be other ways, that a generalized
and undefined right of privacy—one of the problems with the right
of privacy, as Justice Douglas defined it, or did not define it, is not
simply that it comes out of nowhere, that it does not have any rooting in the Constitution, it is also that he does not give it any contours, so you do not know what it is going to mean from case to
case. The CHAIRMAN. Let's talk about another basic right, at least I
think a basic right, the right not to be sterilized by the government. The Supreme Court addressed that right in the famous case,
Skinner v. Oklahoma. Under Oklahoma law, someone convicted of
certain crimes faced mandatory sterilization. In 1942, Mr. Skinner
had been convicted of his third offense and therefore, faced sterilization, brought his case to the Supreme Court. The Court said that
the State of Oklahoma could not sterilize him. Let me read some­thing from the Court's opinion.
"We are dealing with legislation which involves one of the basic civil rights of man. Marriage and procreation are fundamental to
the very existence and survival of a race. There is no redemption
for the individual whom the law touches. Any experiment which
the State conducts is to his irreparable injury. He is forever de­prived of a basic liberty."
Judge, you said that Supreme Court decision is improper and in­tellectually empty. I would like to ask you, do you think that there
is a basic right, under the Constitution, not to forcibly sterilized by
the State? Judge BORK. There may well be, but not on the grounds stated
there. I hate to keep saying this, Mr. Chairman, much of my objection is to the way some members of the Court, not always the
whole Court, has gone about deriving these things. In Skinner v.
Oklahoma, I think it might have been better to say that the statute
does not have a reasonable basis because there is no scientific evidence upon which to rest the thought that criminality—that was,
not then, I do not know anything about the state of scientific evidence now—that criminality is really genetically carried.
The CHAIRMAN. But if there was, they would be able to sterilize?
Judge BORK. Well, I do not know. The second thing about that statute, in this case, is that Justice Douglas did say something which is quite correct and he did not need to talk about procrea­tion and fundamental rights to do it. That is, he noted that the statute made distinctions, for example, between a robber and an embezzler. The embezzler was not subject to this kind of thing.
Had he gone on and pointed out that those distinctions really sterilized, in effect, blue collar criminals and exempted white collar criminals, and indeed, appeared to have some taint of a racial basis to it, he could have arrived at the same decision in what I would take to be a more legitimate fashion.
The CHAIRMAN. I thought that under the equal protection clause, that was the essence of it and you have written—I may be mistak­en—I thought you had written that there is no basis under the equal protection clause for having arrived at that conclusion.
Judge BORK. Not the way he did it. What the Court was doing with the equal protection clause for many years, and to which I ob­jected more generally in this article, is that they would decide whether a whole group was in or out and then they would decide what level of scrutiny they would give to the statute to see whether it was constitutional or not.
I think that derives—and I hate to get into a technical ques­tion—but I think it derives from a footnote in the Carolene Products case, in which they were supposed to look at groups, as such. It would be much better if instead of taking groups as such and saying this group is in, that group is out, if they merely used a rea­sonable basis test and asked whether the law had a reasonable basis. I think the statute, in Skinner v. Oklahoma, the sterilization statute, would have failed under a reasonable basis test.
The CHAIRMAN. SO you have to find a reasonable basis. If there is one, you could sterilize. If there is not one, you cannot. It seems to me that it comes down to a basic difference. You do not believe the Constitution recognizes what I consider to be a basic liberty, a basic liberty not to be sterilized.
Judge BORK. I agree that that is a basic liberty, and I agree that family life is a basic liberty and so forth. But the fact is we know that legislatures can, constitutionally, regulate some aspects of sex­uality.
The CHAIRMAN. True.
Judge BORK. We know that legislatures do and can constitution­ally regulate some aspects of family life. There is no question, I think, that these things are subject to some regulation. We have divorce laws, custody laws, child beating laws and so forth. The question always becomes, under the equal protection clause, has the legislature a reasonable basis for the kind of thing it does here.
The sterilization law would probably require an enormous or per­haps impossible degree of justification.
The CHAIRMAN. I hope so.
Judge, my time is about up, but with regard to the Griswold case, you are quoted in 1985—you were a judge at this time, al­though this statement was not made in your judicial capacity—as saying, "I don't think there is a supportable method of constitu­tional reasoning underlying the Griswold decision."
So obviously, you thought about it, and you at least at that point
concluded you could not find one.
It seems to me, Judge—and as I said, there are many more cases
I would like to talk to you about, and I appreciate you engaging in
this dialogue—that you say that a State can impact upon marital
relations and can impact upon certain other relations, and it seems
to me that there are certain basic rights that they cannot touch.
And what you seem to be saying to me is that a State legislature
can theoretically, at least, pass a law sterilizing, and we will see
what the courts say. It is not an automatic, it is not basic. Right
now, if any State legislature in the country asked counsel for the
legislature, "Could we pass a law, sterilizing?" I suspect the immediate response from counsel would be, "No, you cannot do that"— not only politically, but constitutionally.
Have any State legislative bodies said, "Can we decide on wheth­er or not someone can or cannot use contraceptives," not any reasonable basis, I imagine all counsel would say "No" flatly; cannot even get into that area.
And it seems to me you are not saying that. You are saying that it is possible that can happen, and in Griswold you are saying that
there is no principle upon which they could reach the result—not the rationale, you say; you say the result.
Judge BORK. Well, I think I was talking about the principle un­derlying that one. But I should say The CHAIRMAN. Well, wait, let me stop you there, Judge, because
I want to make sure I understand. The principle underlying that
one is the basic right to privacy, right, and from that flows all
these other cases, all the way down to Franz, which you spoke to;
all the way down to Roe v. Wade. They all are premised upon that basic principle that you cannot find.
I am not saying you are wrong. I just want to make sure I under­stand what you are saying. Judge BORK. Well, I do not think all those cases necessarily
follow. They used the right of privacy in some of those cases, and it was not clear why it was a right of privacy.
I should say that I think not only Justices Black and Stewart could not find it—and Gerald Gunther, who is a professor at Stanford and an authority in these matters, has criticized the case; and
Professor Philip Kurland has referred to Griswold v. Connecticut as a "blatant usurpation."
The CHAIRMAN. But most did find it; the majority did find it, though, didn't they?
Judge BORK. Yes. But I am just telling you, Senator, that a lot of people have thought the reasoning of that case was just not reason­ing.
The CHAIRMAN. My time is up. Judge, I want to make it clear, I am not suggesting there is anything extreme about your reasoning. I am not suggesting it is conservative or liberal. I just want to make sure I understand it. And as I understand what you have said in the last 30 minutes, a State legislative body, a government, can, if it so chose, pass a law saying married couples cannot use
birth control devices.
Judge BORK. Senator, Mr. Chairman, I have not said that; I do
not want to say that. What I am saying to you is that if that law is
to be struck down, it will have to be done under better constitution­al argumentation than was present in the Griswold opinion.
The CHAIRMAN. Again I will end, to quote you, sir, you said, "The truth is that the Court could not reach the result in Griswold through principle." I assume you are talking about constitutional principle.
Judge BORK. I do not know—what is that from? The CHAIRMAN. I am referring to your 1971 article. That is the
quote in the 1971 article. And then you said Judge BORK. DO you have a page number for that, Senator? The CHAIRMAN. I will get the page. Sorry—a 1982 speech while
you were Judge, speaking at Catholic University. You said, "The result in Griswold could not have been reached by proper interpre­tation of the Constitution." End of quote. We will dig it out for you here to show you—I believe you all sent it to us, so that is how we got it.
Judge BORK. OK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. Well, my time is up. I appreciate it. We will do more of this. I yield—I see Senator Byrd is here. Did you have an opening statement you wished to make, Senator? Senator THURMOND. I was just going to say I will yield to Senator Byrd if he wishes to make an opening statement.
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Byrd. We are going to cease the ques­tioning for a moment while Senator Byrd makes his opening state­ment.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROBERT C. BYRD
Senator BYRD. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for allowing me to in­tervene at this point to make my opening statement—or, to make a
statement; this may be the opening and the closing statement. And I thank Senator Thurmond and my other colleagues on the
committee for allowing me to proceed. I join with all of my colleagues in welcoming Judge Bork back
before the Judiciary Committee and in welcoming him to these
hearings; and I apologize for not being present to hear your opening statement. I assume you will be making further statements, so
I can use the word "opening" advisedly. I compliment you, Judge Bork, on this nomination, and I not
only wish to express a hearty welcome to you, but also to your
lovely wife and your sons and daughter, who I am told are seated
here in the audience today. As I have stated so many times in the past, the Senate has both
the right and the duty to scrutinize as carefully as possible the individuals who are nominated to serve on the Supreme Court of the
United States.
Unlike the case when we consider legislation, the Senate has no
second chance in passing on lifetime appointments. As an equal
partner with the President in making these appointments, the
Senate should consider the nominee's integrity, candor, temperment, experience, education, and judicial philosophy.
So we meet here today to begin the exercise of that responsibil­ity.
For my own part, I have certain questions, which I hope that if I am not here to ask them, that the committee will endeavor to secure answers for them, and certainly to explore them. I am inter­ested in your apparent belief in the concept of judicial restraint.
Let me say also at this early point in my statement that it does not bother me that you are a conservative. I am a conservative. Ev­erybody knows that from the shirts that we are wearing today. I did not wear a blue shirt, nor did you, nor did I see Strom Thur­mond nor Orrin Hatch. But not so facetiously, I am not troubled that you are a conservative. I am not even troubled that the nomi­nation and confirmation of a conservative to fill this position which will become vacant will tilt the Court in the direction of a conserv­ative Court.
I think that the Supreme Court of the United States should be a conservative Court. I think the Court should be conservative. I happen to believe that the body in our constitutional system that should be liberal, if at all, is the legislative body, in which I serve. But I do not construe the intent of the writers of our Constitu­tion—I do not believe that they intended for the Supreme Court of the United States to be a "travelling Constitutional Convention", as the late Mr. Justice Hugo Black referred to at one point in a statement.
I think that the legislature is here to make the laws; that is what the founders said in the first sentence of the first article of the Constitution of the United States. So I intend, as far as I am con­cerned, to not make my final judgment, and it is not made if I had to answer before God right at this moment, as to how I would vote on your nomination; I could not say.
The fact that you are a conservative does not bother me, and it does not bother me if the Court becomes what is called a conserva­tive court because I was very critical of the court in earlier years. When Chief Justice Warren held that position, I was very critical of the Court.
And this is one vote for or against you at some point, but I will just say that to make it very clear that I do not personally want to see another Warren Court in my lifetime.
But I am interested in your apparent belief in the concept of ju­dicial restraint. You have used this term in many instances, both in your writings—which are very extensive—in your teachings, and in your service as a Member of the U.S. District Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia.
You have called for judges to defer to the will of the people as expressed through their elected representatives. This makes good sense.
I shall ask a question which is a rhetorical question, but which I am sure this committee will explore and which I very much need the answer to in making my own decision on your nomination.
Where in your embrace of majority rule is the protection for the rights of the minority? Now, as the majority leader of the Senate and one who has been the minority leader of the Senate, I am very conscious of the rights of the minority, and I chafe often because I feel that the rights of the majority are being abused by the minori­ty, and I feel that the majority should rule. But at the same time, I
feel that the minority has some rights, too, in the Senate of the United States.
So I am sure it can be appreciated that I would ask this question. We are both interested in majority rule, but where do you embrace in your concept of judicial restraint the rights of the minority?
You have written extensively as a legal theorist about deference to majority will. But are your views on standing so restrictive that the little guy, or even the U.S. Senate, has no hope of ever getting his or her or its day in court?
I read a great deal about you, and as I have indicated, I have a tremendous amount of respect for you, and I admire you. I believe that the committee should explore your beliefs, your philosophy, in several areas.
As majority leader, my duties will often require my presence on the Senate floor, and I will not be able to attend these hearings as much as I would like to attend them. I wish I could be here. I will read the record carefully, not just turn it over to a staff member before I reach my final decision on your nomination, and I will be watching the tapes as much as I can in the evenings so that I truly can keep abreast as much as possible of these hearings.
I hope that the committee will be able to ask you and other wit­nesses to address these concerns, some of which I am mentioning here.
First and perhaps most fundamentally, the committee should in­quire about your understanding of and adherence to the principle of judicial restraint. It has been argued that you apply this philoso­phy selectively. One report even suggests that it is possible to de­termine the outcome of your decisions depending on the parties to a case.
Now, having been in the political arena for 42 years, I know how charges are made, and often made without substantial good reason. But this is the purpose of these hearings, to determine in our own viewpoints and in answer to our own consciences, where do you stand. Is it true that you apply the philosophy of judicial restraint selectively? And is it true that depending on whether or not the participants are the government and a utility or some other busi­ness, that you will decide this way or that way; depending upon whether or not it is a government agency and an individual or a public interest group, you will decide this way or that way, and it can almost be foretold before you speak as to where you will come down?
I do not know. But I have read that, and I have read some cases that would indicate that at least there is some good reason to think that.
So I hope that the committee will discuss with you whether these reports are mere coincidence or an integral part of your philosophy as you apply it. I hope that the committee will consider your un­derstanding of the separation of powers. Here is where I become very, very much involved. As a proponent of judicial restraint, you have on some occasions, I believe, stated that the judiciary should not usurp the authority of the executive or legislative branches of the government. And I believe that, too; I think that the judiciary has at times usurped the role and the powers—I should say the role, certainly—of the legislative branch.
Yet some of your theories and decisions suggest that you consistently favor the supremacy of the executive over the legislative
when these two authorities are at odds. That may be true; maybe it
is not. That is what we should try to find out. I am disturbed if that is indeed the case.
For example, you testified in 1973 against legislation to establish an independent special prosecutor, despite the fact that experience
shows that trusting the executive to investigate itself is a resounding reaffirmation of the fable of the fox guarding the chicken coop.
And in a case decided only this year, I believe you suggested that
what is commonly referred to as executive privilege may be dele­gated by the President to others.
I am interested in knowing more about just how far your views go as to such delegation because of the fear that such a view could
have had a devastating impact on the public's right to know and
the public's right to discover the abuses of Watergate and the Iran Contra affair.
In the case of Barnes v. Kline, you stated that Congress has no right to bring a court challenge to the improper use of the veto
power by the executive, maintaining that such issues should be decided in the give and take of politics. Now, if I am wrong in anything I have said, you will correct me, and I will respect the correc­tion.
But I ask a rhetorical question: Why should the country have to suffer the effects of stalemate and acrimony between two branches of government?
As Alexander Pope said, "Who shall decide when doctors disagree?" So, when the President, when the executive and the legislative
disagree, who shall decide? And my understanding is that nobody
else should decide other than the Supreme Court or the courts, ultimately, the Supreme Court; and of course, if it is a political thicket, I can understand how in instances it is appropriate to look upon
that as a political question. But we are talking about the pocket
veto or the veto power of the President of the United States, vetoing a piece of legislation that has been written by the elected representatives of the people of this country. And a pocket veto is not
something to be taken lightly. And what are the powers of the
President of the United States under this Constitution when it
comes to exercising the pocket veto? What is his authority? Where
does his authority end? This is not a mere political question. This is a question that may
involve the health and welfare for the national defense, for the national security of the people of this country.
Why should the unconstitutional act, if it be one, of one branch
of the government go unchecked? Who will decide such disputes if
not the Court?
I am in agreement with the results of many of your policies as I
understand them, particularly in the area of criminal law—the exclusionary rule. So my feelings very much comport with what I
think I have observed as having been in your position in certain
cases. In my view, some courts have failed to give appropriate consideration to the rights of the majority and the victims of crimes
and the potential victims of crimes in criminal cases. Laws designed to be tough on criminals are necessary and should be en­forced, as you have pointed out.
It is difficult to appreciate the argument that the death penalty is unconstitutional when it is referred to in the Constitution. Cap­ital punishment is referred to time and time again in the amend­ments to the Constitution.
There is another area of your philosophy that is of particular in­terest to me—your criticism of the election campaign laws. Follow­ing a period of abuse, Congress passed laws limiting the amount of campaign contributions and requiring disclosure of such contribu­tions. Even though the whole Supreme Court upheld the major pro­visions of these election laws, I believe you have stated that you believe these provisions are unconstitutional as a violation of the freedom of speech.
We have had campaign financing reform legislation, now before the Senate, for months. We had the seventh cloture vote on it today, and failed to get cloture, so this is very much on my mind at the moment. But how can one reconcile his aggressiveness against this reform legislation with a general philosophy that judges should exercise restraint in finding legislation to be unconstitution­al?
I look forward to your testimony. I know that it will be useful to me in making up my mind on your nomination.
I believe that the Court should exercise judicial restraint and that judges should not substitute their personal views for the will of the people or the Constitution.
As Justice Hugo Black observed in 1970 failure of the Court to adhere to the language of the Constitution makes it dangerously simple for courts to operate as a continuing Constitutional Conven­tion. I am troubled by the thought, however, of judicial restraint if it is carried to the extreme, that it can become its own peculiar kind of judicial activism.
Therefore our role in the Senate is to determine whether your theory of judicial restraint is simply that of a constitutional con­servative or whether it cloaks a private agenda as some have said, to overturn those court decisions with which you openly disagree.
As we celebrate the bicentennial of our Constitution, it is entire­ly fitting that we discuss the allegiance to and regard for the Con­stitution of a person to whom we are contemplating and trusting major responsibility for its interpretation and application. I do not question your allegiance to that Constitution. I do not have to ask you any questions on that point. I do not have to question your regard for the Constitution. But the Constitution is no ordinary document, and this is no ordinary appointment. And these are not ordinary times.
The foundation of our Government is that Constitution, and we should insist on a standard no less than that of the first Chief Jus­tice, John Marshall, who admonished that we must never forget that it is the Constitution that we are expounding.
Mr. Chairman, I was told that the Senators would have 30 min­utes for their opening statements. That constitutes my opening statement. I would be happy to hear Judge Bork's response. I would like to hear him respond if he cares to respond, since I saw him taking some notes or making some notes. I would be happy to
hear his response. And then, may I assure Judge Bork that if I
have to leave, it will not be through any discourtesy or intention to
run away, but I shall follow his appearances here and read with
great interest the words that he speaks into the record as he responds to this committee's questions. The CHAIRMAN. I say to the majority leader it is slightly different than what we have been doing, but Judge, just as you can appreciate the Court has certain rules, when the majority leader of
the United States Senate sits down and says he understood it to be
30 minutes, we all understand it to be 30 minutes. And I may be
chairman of this committee, but I am not slow.  So what I would suggest is—I understand if I ask unanimous consent, since it is not the way in which we were going to go, if we
should suggest that we would proceed to allow the witness to respond if he wishes to do anything that Senator Byrd said. Let me check with my ranking member. Senator THURMOND. That will be all right, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. SO if you would like to, Judge, please respond; if
not Judge BORK. Senator, I should say that I was jotting down some
notes for further investigation, but I guess I will talk about them
now. The CHAIRMAN. YOU need not talk about them now. Judge BORK. NO, no; I would be glad to. The response I will give
now will not be as full as I might give as we get into this. My criticism of the Federal Election Campaign Act was really, as
I recall, largely that the contribution limits were too low and the
disclosure limits were too low. And I think I pointed out that
Eugene McCarthy's campaign in New Hampshire, which persuaded
President Johnson not to run again, could not have been financed
under limits that low, and that the disclosure limits were so low
that a lot of people who would like to support a position or a candidate, but who were in sensitive positions—like a president of a university or something of that sort—effectively could not contribute. I think, as I understand it, for example, inflation had shrunk the
contribution limit by the time I spoke from $1,000, I think it was,
to $700 or $800. As I understand it, you have now indexed that so
that inflation will no longer eat it away. I think my difficulties are more with the levels at which they
were set as being unrealistic enough to raise a problem; and
indeed, I think various judges had different—on the Supreme
Court, I think Chief Justice Burger had that problem with the statute, among other things. On Barnes v. Kline, which is my view of congressional standing,
that view, Senator, is dictated by my view of judicial restraint.
Now, the pocket veto case that you mentioned: I agree, I took the
position in the executive branch, which I think this committee now
has in its hands, that a pocket veto is not valid where Congress,
the Senate and the House, have left an agent to receive that return
veto—even though the House and the Senate are out, adjourned.
But the difficulty with allowing in that case Congressmen to sue
the President, saying that this pocket veto is unconstitutional
action, is simply this—the theory was that the Congressmen had
official office which was somehow diminished by the President's
action. By parity of reasoning, the President could sue the Congress very easily. If the Congress passes a bill over his veto, requiring the President to do something which he regards as unconstitutional, there is no reason under the reasoning of the other case why he could not come into the Court down the hill and start a lawsuit to declare the Congress' bill unconstitutional.
Indeed, if you adjust judges' duties in any way, there is no reason why a judge could not sue, and in fact it has gotten to this point. The Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reversed two District Court judges out there, and the judges petitioned for certiorari on the grounds that their functions had been damaged. That is what worries me. If everybody can sue everybody in the government on the grounds of functions, then every governmental issue will come into court instantly and be decided by courts, which would be an enormous expansion of the power of the courts over the other two branches.
In the pocket veto case, I did say explicitly not only that the President and the Congress could fight it out, but that if a private party brought an action—in fact, that is the way the original pocket veto cases arose; Indian tribes claiming that they had lost money that was due them because of an invalid pocket veto sued. In that kind of a case, I have no problem at all with standing to challenge a pocket veto. It is only when the Court gets into just general issues between the branches so that every issue comes im­mediately into court, and the courts decide every aspect of govern­mental power; I think that is unfortunate. And I think that is con­sistent with not only my standing rule, but my view of judicial re­straint.
I cannot recall the case in which I talked about the President—I did not think I said the President could delegate executive privi­lege to others; I think I said—I would have to check this—I think I said that there was reason to believe that those officials who are part of the Presidency and who communicate with the President might have executive privilege to that extent. I did not decide the issue. What I was doing was protesting that the majority which did decide the issue, decided it the other way, and I did not think it was up before us, and I just suggested that it might go the other way from the way they went if it were before us.
But I will have fuller answers to all of these questions, Senator. I am not even sure I got all of your points down here.
Senator BYRD. Mr. Chairman, I am sorry if I have transgressed on the understandings that were set forth at the beginning, and if I have gone over my time, I am sorry.
The CHAIRMAN. NO, you have not. Senator BYRD. I will not take the time of the committee in re­sponding to the response at this time. The CHAIRMAN. We understand the responsibilities as the Leader of the Senate make it difficult for you to be here.
I am going to trespass 60 more seconds on the ranking member's time here, just so you have time, or your staff—you asked about the quote from Griswold and where I got it. It was on page 9 of the neutral principles article, in the Indiana Law Journal, and I will quote it:
Griswold, then, is an unprincipled decision, both in the way in which it derives a new constitutional right and the way in which it defines the right or, rather, fails to define it, where, left with no idea of the sweep of the right to privacy and have no notion of the cases to which it may or may not be applied in the future. The truth is that the Court could not reach its result in Griswold through principle. The reason is obvious. Every clash between minorities claiming freedom and majorities claim­ing power to regulate involves a choice between gratifications of two groups. When the Constitution has not spoken, the Court will be able to find no scale other than its own value preferences upon which to weigh the respective claims of pleasure."
Compare the facts in Griswold with the hypothetical suit by an electric utility company and one of its customers to void a smoke pollution ordinance as unconsti­tutional. The cases are identical. In Griswold, a husband and wife assert that they have a right to sexual relations without fear of unwanted children. The law impairs their gratification,
et cetera. That is page 9.
And then
Judge BORK. Senator, the entire discussion, I think, is premised on the notion that the Constitution does not speak—that the Court
has not demonstrated that the Constitution speaks in this area.
And if that is true, that Justice Douglas' demonstration fails, then that is where we are.
The CHAIRMAN. I will not read the quote, but in your speech pro­vided by your office, at Catholic University in Washington, D.C.,
March 31, 1982, entitled, "Catholic University Speech", on page 4 is the other quote that I referred to.
Judge BORK. OK.
The CHAIRMAN. I thank my colleague from South Carolina, and please proceed. What we will do, Judge, because I know time is getting late, we
will do Senator Thurmond, Senator Kennedy, then take a break, and then we will come back for as much time as you like.
Thank you.
Senator Thurmond.
Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Judge Bork, we have a great many people here who have a great many questions. I will propound these questions rather fast. You can answer them fast, unless you want to take more time; I will leave that entirely to your judgment.
Judge Bork, in view of some of the comments concerning your criticizing past Supreme Court decisions, I think it would be appro­priate to have a statement from you on how you view the prece­dents of the Supreme Court.
Would you please comment on what criteria you think are im­portant in deciding whether to re-examine past Supreme Court de­cisions?
Judge BORK. Yes, Senator. I think precedent is important, and as I have explained, anybody with a philosophy of original intent requires a theory of precedent.
What would I look at? Well, I think I would look and be absolutely sure that the prior decision was incorrectly decided. That is necessary. And if it is wrongly decided—and you have to give respect
to your predecessors' judgment on these matters—the presumption
against overruling remains, because it may be that there are private expectations built up on the basis of the prior decision. It may
be that governmental and private institutions have grown up
around that prior decision. There is a need for stability and continuity in the law. There is a need for predictability in legal doc­trine. And it is important that the law not be considered as shifting every time the personnel of the Supreme Court changes.
So those are some of the factors I would consider as reasons to uphold a prior decision. There are also reasons to overrule it. I could list those factors, too.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, much of the criticism lodged against you stems from articles and speeches attributed to you over the years which are critical of various rulings of the Supreme Court. Do you feel a distinction should be drawn between your pri­vate writings and any responsibilities you would have as a Su­preme Court Justice?
Judge BORK. AS a professor, I felt free to—and indeed was en­couraged to—engage in theoretical discussion. I primarily aimed my writing at Supreme Court decisions which I thought were not adequately explained—and explanation is the heart of judging.
As a judge, you cannot be as speculative. And I once said to one of the members of this committee, when I was asked whether I would behave in a courtroom the way I would in a classroom, and I said no; in a classroom, nobody gets hurt. In a courtroom, some­body always gets hurt, which calls for a great deal more caution and circumspection than you are required to show when you give a speech at Indiana or some other place.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, some have said that you are a conservative activist. My impression is that your writings and your opinions on the Court indicate that you are a strong proponent of judicial restraint.
Would you briefly explain to the committee what you believe is the role of a judge in interpreting the Constitution and the laws of this country?
Judge BORK. Well, as I said in my opening statement, Senator Thurmond, I think the obligation is to do the will of the lawmaker. If the lawmaker is Congress, writing a statute, or whether the law­makers are the ratifying conventions of the Constitution, you de­termine the will, the value, that was intended in a number of ways—from the text, which may not be all that clear sometimes; from the legislative history and the expectations and public discus­sions surrounding the enactment of the law or the Constitution; from the way people at the beginning interpreted it, people who could be expected to know more about it than we know now. In a variety of ways, you manage to define a principle that you can apply to modern circumstances.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, in 1985, you stated,
If the Justices become convinced that a decision cannot be squared with the Con­stitution, they ought to consider overruling it, but the Court should be careful. If a particular decision has become the basis for a large array of social and economic institutions, overruling it could be disastrous.
Now, the question is could you give me an example of a constitutional decision that you would not be willing to overrule, even if you concluded that decision was wrong?
Judge BORK. Well, I have to include some decisions that I do not think are wrong, but I would not consider overruling them.
I gave the example already of the enormous scope of the com­merce clause. I think it is much too late to overrule any of that. Senator THURMOND. By the way, do not drop your voice too low, please. Judge BORK. I am sorry. I think I also gave the example of the legal tender cases about
paper money. But for example, there have been Bill of Rights
cases, the freedom of the press cases—a whole industry is built up
around an understanding of the freedom of the press. It is too late
to try to, even if one wanted to—and I have no desire to; I think
those cases are correct—even if one wanted to, one simply could
not go back and tear up the communications industry of this country.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, you have written that, and I quote, One of our constitutional freedoms or rights clearly given in the text is the power to govern ourselves democratically. Every time a court creates a new constitutional right against government or expands without warrant an old one, the constitutional freedom of citizens to control their lives is diminished.
Now, the question is, could you elaborate on why this reasoning
leads you to conclude that activist judges will not truly expand
rights and freedoms, but instead will merely redistribute them? Judge BORK. All right, Senator. I will be glad to talk about that.
The Constitution clearly gives majorities the right to rule large
areas of life simply because they are majorities. And that is a freedom, that is a liberty, of the majority. The Constitution also says
there are some things no majority should be allowed to do to a minority or to an individual. That is fine. That is known as the resolution of what has been called "James Madison's dilemma". But if a judge steps into an area that the Constitution says is for
majorities and says the majority may not do these things, despite
what the Constitution says, then he has taken away a majority
freedom and placed it in the minority. That is merely a redistribution of liberty, not an increase of it. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, the ninth amendment to the
Constitution provides that the enumeration in the Constitution of
certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others
retained by the people. What do you believe the ninth amendment
means? Judge BORK. That is an extremely difficult question, Senator, because nobody has ever to my knowledge understood precisely what
the ninth amendment did mean and what it was intended to do.
And throughout almost all of our history, no court ever relied upon
it. And in fact, the Supreme Court has yet to rely on it. Justice
Goldberg did in one case. I have seen—not mastered, but seen—some historical research
appearing in the Virginia Law Review which suggests that what
this amendment means is that the enumeration of Federal rights
in the Bill of Rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage the
rights retained by the people in their State constitutions. And that
is the only explanation that has any plausibility to it that I have
seen so far.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, comments have been made that
you take a restrictive view of the first amendment and that many
years ago, you were of the opinion that only political speech was
protected. Have your views changed in this area, and would you
briefly tell the committee what areas of speech you think fall
within the protection of the first amendment?
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I should point out I am a little sur­prised that what was an academic exercise and engaging in a
debate and trying out a theory has become somehow the core of my
philosophy. The article itself said at the end that these remarks
are intended to be tentative and exploratory. At the moment, I do
not see how I can avoid them. My views have changed for the simple reason—I was looking for
a bright-line test by which judges could decide which speech was
protected and which was not. I have since become persuaded—in
fact, I was persuaded by my colleagues very quickly—that the
bright-line made no sense; it would be impossible to follow. There is
no reason, if somebody wants to engage in moral discourse to say it
is not protected unless he ends it by saying, "and therefore, I propose that we pass a law." So my bright-line eroded, and I now think—I have for some
time—first amendment protection applies to moral discourse, it applies to scientific speech, it applies to news, it applies to opinion, it
applies to literature. I gave up my attempt to construct a new
theory there. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, I have read that your critics say that you would deprive a divorced, noncustodial parent of visitation
rights with his children. I believe the criticism arose because of
views you expressed in Franz v. United States, a case involving an
individual in the government's witness protection program. Would
you tell the committee your position in this case? Judge BORK. In that case, Senator, Congress had passed a witness
protection statute which, as I recall, did not deal with this issue. In
this case, it was a witness who married a divorced woman with
children, and they disappeared in this program—and the divorced
husband could not find his children. Now, it seemed to me there
were two solutions to that. One, which was my idea, was to get that
issue back in Congress, because Congress had not faced it, and I do
not know, really, whether it wanted to do that. And therefore, I
said I am not at all sure that this program does not violate Pennsylvania domestic relations law, and it is not clear that Congress
intended to preempt the domestic relations laws of the States. I thought a holding along those lines would put the issue back in
Congress where it could be considered and a legislative solution
worked out, and it also gives this fellow his rights. But a majority of my Court decided to create a new constitutional right, right there. I think you reach a constitutional right, new
or old, only if—you do not reach it if you can first get the Congress
of the United States to decide whether they really want to do this
thing or not; then you face the constitutional question. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, as you know, the Supreme Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education is one of the landmark decisions of the century. You have said that you think Brown
was correctly decided, and you have praised Brown as an example
of the Court applying an old principle according to a new understanding of a social situation.
Judge Bork, does this conflict with your views on how the consti­tutional law should be read? Judge BORK. NO, I do not think it does, Senator, but let me make a preparatory remark.
I have seen some evidence that the likelihood that the amend­ment was intended to stop segregation is greater than I had origi­nally thought, and that Plessy v. Ferguson and the later segrega­tion laws came afterwards, when the Supreme Court had changed and the legislatures had changed in the South. So that as a matter of original intent, I am not at all sure that segregation was not in­tended to be eliminated.
But let me proceed on the assumption that separate but equal was intended by those who framed the 14th amendment. The rule they wrote was no individual shall be denied the equal protection of the law. They may have written that rule on the assumption—a background assumption—that you could get equal protection or equality with separation or segregation.
If they did, then by 1954 it had become abundantly clear that the background assumption was false. You cannot get equality with segregation. At that point the Court is faced with a choice: Does it enforce the rule—equal protection—or enforce the background as­sumption that the framers and ratifiers made. I think it is clear that you have to enforce the rule, the background assumption being false, and that leads directly to no segregation, and it leads to Brown v. Board of Education.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, it has been reported that be­cause of comments you have made in the Bakke case that you oppose affirmative action programs. Is that in fact your position?
Judge BORK. There are two kinds of affirmative action. The origi­nal version of affirmative action, which I fully supported, was that institutions should reach out to inform minorities and so forth that opportunities of certain sorts existed that they may not know exist­ed, and to reach out and try to identify and help qualified individ­uals into those.
Later on, those programs begin to change into programs about specified numbers of people being brought in differently. That began to worry me. I certainly would not have minded preferential treatment by private institutions for a period of time, until we could bring blacks and other racial minorities into the American mainstream.
It did begin to worry me, however, if those preferences became permanent, because that leads to resentment from other groups. It will lead to demands for preferences from other groups; it will lead to individuals feeling that they earned something and will never get it because they are not of the right ethnic group. That worries me.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, comments have been made that you oppose certain rights of women. Justification for this attack is founded on your purported views that the equal protection clause should not be used to protect a woman's rights.
Do you feel that the equal protection clause is appropriate for the protection of women's rights, and would you please address this criticism?
Judge BORK. Yes, certainly, Senator. At the time I wrote about the equal protection clause, the Court had never extended the clause to women. But in addition to that, as I think I said in reply to another Senator—perhaps, the Chairman—the Court was in the process of saying it applies to blacks, it applies to illegitimate chil­dren, it applies to somebody else, and they were picking groups— which I thought was a wrong way to apply it. I think you apply it by requiring a reasonable basis for any distinction made between individuals or groups.
Now, in the case of race, it will be impossible, virtually, to find a reasonable distinction that will justify discrimination.
In the case of gender, it will depend on the particular issue. While it is possible to say in the area of race, no difference of treat­ment, it is not entirely possible to say that in the case of gender, simply because of physical differences. Combat—maybe the equal protection clause does not require that.
But in that sense, requiring a reasonable basis for any distinction made—yes, the clause applies to women; it applies to every person.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, some have said that you would deny individuals and groups access to the courts. I realize that the area of determining standing to maintain an action is very com­plex. However, would you briefly comment on this area?
Judge BORK. Yes, Senator. Standing—I will comment briefly, as you suggest.
I think you will find my decisions are squarely in line with the decisions of the Supreme Court on standing, which is an important concept. And in particular, I think my views are almost entirely those that are expressed in his opinions by Justice Lewis Powell. I do not think there is anything more restrictive about me than about most judges.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, recently a report was received that a senior U.S. judge had raised a question about your integrity. Apparently after hearing the case of Vander Jagt v. O'Neill, it was reported that after an agreement on the disposition of the case, you were chosen to write the opinion for the panel. However, the opin­ion you wrote, while upholding the result, did so on grounds other than those which had been discussed and agreed to by the other judges.
As a result, a different opinion was issued by the other two judges, and you wrote a concurring opinion. The implication is that you tried to force your views on the panel. Would you tell us what actually happened?
Judge BORK. Yes, Senator. I do not understand what happened with this Judge Gordon, who wrote that letter. The fact is any judge, when he sits down to write, sometimes has the experience that it will not write that way; you agreed on a ground, and it will not write that way. That is what happened in this case.
I then went back to Roger Robb, who was the senior judge on the panel, and talked to him about it and explained to him I thought a standing issue would go much better than a political question doc­trine issue or a speech and debate issue. And I gave him the rea­sons—I will not spell them all out here, but they are in the papers.
He agreed—I thought. I left, and drafted it. I should have written
to Judge Gordon then. He was down in Kentucky. I did not. I redrafted it. The fact is that Judge Robb's secretary remembers me coming in
to have that conversation; my clerks remember me going up and
coming back and saying that Judge Robb had agreed. I then sent the—I have some documents about this here, Senator,
if I can find them—I then sent the draft around to Judge Robb,
who was in the hospital with a broken hip—he had fallen—and to
Judge Gordon. The letter I sent with the draft to Judge Gordon says, "It occurs
to me too late, that I should have notified you in advance that I
had changed the rationale in the Vander Jagt case to one of lack of
standing. After I got started on the opinion, it became apparent
that it was harder to dispose of the case under either the political
question doctrine or the Speech or Debate Clause. The Supreme
Court's opinion in Valley Forge, on the other hand, made it relatively easy to dispose of the case on the standing ground. This tack
was also indicated because there are some en bane rehearings coming up in this circuit for which the
other two grounds might have implications." I did not want to seem to be deciding the en bane court's cases
for them in advance. "That would have complicated the writing of the opinion based
upon political question or Speech and Debate." "In any event, I regret not having apprised you of my thinking
earlier in the process of writing." "Best wishes, sincerely."
So we went on. Then Judge Gordon was assigned the task of
writing the opinion on yet a fourth ground, one that had not been
discussed at the conference, and there is a memorandum from me
here to both of those judges which is too long to read at the
moment Senator THURMOND. What is the date of that letter? Judge BORK. The letter to Judge Gordon is September 24, 1982; it
is when I transmitted the—oh, I am sorry—I appear to have misstated. I sent the draft to both Judge Robb and Judge Gordon, and
then a week later I sent this letter explaining why I had changed
the rationale to Judge Gordon. Judge Gordon then redrafted the
opinion on a new basis and sent it around and I wrote a concurring
opinion. Now, after all of this had happened and after an experience, which Judge Gordon now says caused him to think that I was
trying to sneak an opinion past him. He sent his draft back—and
there was never any discussion of this—he sent his draft back and
closed the letter with "May I take this opportunity of expressing to
you my pleasure in sitting with you last March and the making of
your acquaintance, and I wish for you and yours a happy and
joyous Yuletide Season," which did not alert me to the fact that he
thought he had, in any way, been run around. But the accusation is preposterous in any event, Senator, because
when I circulate a draft, the other two judges read it and their
clerks read it. There is no way to write a draft that they are going
to miss and will go out and become the law. In addition to that,
there is a rule in our circuit that when the other two judges have concurred in your draft, you circulate the draft to the full Court, which I think was 11 judges at that time, and their clerks all read it.
So, the thought that anybody would try to run a minority opin­ion through that full Court is just preposterous. There is nothing to the charge. The memories of the people involved, the documenta­tion, and the practicalities of the circumstances indicate that it is just—I do not know what it is but it is certainly a misunderstand­ing.
Senator THURMOND. Judge, would you like those letters to be placed in the record?
Judge BORK. Yes, I will do that.
Senator THURMOND. I ask unanimous consent that those letters be placed in the record. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, they will be placed in the record.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, I understand it in your writings
on antitrust, you have suggested a fairly lenient standard for horizontal mergers. Nevertheless, would you explain how, as a judge,
you have supported the enforcement of the stricter prevailing standard of horizontal mergers?
Judge BORK. I have had, I think, Senator, only one merger case. It was by the Federal Trade Commission against a couple of
makers of aircraft transparencies. The market share was fairly
high. I cannot recall exactly what it was. I ruled for the Federal Trade Commission.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, my time is almost up. I just have about 3 or 4 minutes. Judge Bork, some of our critics have
accused you of taking a very broad view of the President's powers
and a narrow view of the powers of the Congress. With that in
mind, I would like you to comment on the memorandum you wrote
to Attorney General Levi in 1976, in which you offered that some
uses of the pocket veto were constitutionally suspect and should not be allowed or followed by President Ford.
Is this an example in which you are for a narrower view of Presi­dential power than some of your colleagues in the Ford administration and is it true that President Ford eventually issued a state­ment essentially adopting your position?
Judge BORK. That is all true, Senator. Senator Kennedy was the plaintiff in a case known as Kennedy v. Sampson, challenging—I
think it was a pocket veto, wasn't it, Senator, and I was then Solicitor General. I chose not to appeal that case or try to get that case
into the Supreme Court because I thought it was a terrible case and we would lose it.
I then communicated my decision on that to the Attorney Gener­al and executive branch. The White House knew about it. I cannot
remember who I talked to. They began to use some form of an intermediate veto which said that something like this is a return
veto but if it is not, it is a pocket veto, or vice versa, something like
that. I got disturbed by that because, since I had not taken the
other case up or tried to get it up, I did not think they were free to use it.
The Attorney General, Mr. Levi and I, discussed it, in which dis­cussion I told him that if the administration insisted upon going
ahead with those cases and took them to the Supreme Court, I would not participate. I would not sign the brief and I would not argue the case. We then, in my office, prepared a legal memoran­dum to the White House explaining that the pocket veto ought to be interpreted according to the purpose for which it was designed.
It was clearly designed to prevent a Congress from passing a law and leaving town so that the President had no opportunity to give
a return veto. When the Congress leaves behind an agent to receive
a return veto, it seems to me that purpose is satisfied and the
pocket veto should not be used. That was a position I took inside
the administration, over some opposition, but ultimately we per­suaded the President to that position.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, in a recent interview on June 10, 1987, you indicated that and I quote, "The commerce power of
the federal government had been expanded well beyond probably
what the ratiflers intended. I think it had to expand beyond that as this Nation grew and became more unified. But the change in the
commerce clause is almost entirely a Supreme Court development."
The question is, do you believe that this expansion by the Court
was proper?
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I have not been in that position. I
really do not know. It was inevitable, let me put it that way. The
nation needed a strong federal government with strong powers. For
a time, justices of the Supreme Court objected to that. But the fact
is, the appointment power means that sooner or later, the commerce clause was going to be interpreted in a way that met the
needs of the Nation. That seems to me to be just the way this
Nation grew. It seems to me an inevitable development. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, during your confirmation hearing on your nomination to the second court in 1982, you testified as
to the events surrounding the firing of Archibald Cox and assurances that you made to those involved in the investigation by the
special prosecutor's office. Now, there are individuals who have expressed a different version regarding the assurances you made concerning the investigation. Would you please comment on this
matter? Judge BORK. Well, rather than go through the entire episode, I
think they are focusing upon one meeting. After the firing, on Saturday, October 20th, we met either the next day on Sunday or the
next day on Monday—I used to think it was Sunday because I remembered the Department of Justice was empty, but now I find
out Monday was a holiday so maybe it was empty for that reason—
in any event, Assistant Attorney General Henry Peterson and I
met with Mr. Cox's deputies, Mr. Ruth and Locavara. As I understand the difference in recollection, it is whether or
not tapes were specifically mentioned at that meeting. It was my
recollection they were. The others say not. But I think there is a
common recollection, at least it is shared by a lot of people at that
meeting, that I said they were to go forward as before and that if
we were interfered with, we would all resign. That seems to me to
include tapes, whether or not they were specifically mentioned, because I thought they had been. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, I have one brief question and I
will be through. It appears to me that much of the attack on you is
based on selective citation and taking your statements out of context. Is there any particular area where this has occurred on which
you would like to comment? Judge BORK. Senator, I think there has been a lot of it. I think I
will get to comment on it as we go through these hearings. I do not
think I have time to discuss all of them right now but thank you
for the opportunity.
Senator THURMOND. YOU can save it for later if you want to. Judge BORK. Pardon me? Senator THURMOND. Save it for later if you want to. Judge BORK. All right. Thank you for the opportunity, but I
think I will wait a little bit.
Senator THURMOND. Thank you very much, Judge, and that completes my questions. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. I think maybe it might be
appropriate here to take a short break. Before we do, let me tell you what I would like to try to finish tonight and if you would consider it, Judge. I would like to get three more of my colleagues in,
Senator Kennedy, Senator Hatch, and Senator Metzenbaum. Senator METZENBAUM. Senator Biden, I would prefer not to do
that. The CHAIRMAN. All right. Senator METZENBAUM. I prefer to start in the morning. The CHAIRMAN. Well, then, that is apparently what Senator METZENBAUM. Paul Lucas and I always agree. The CHAIRMAN. I apologize. Is that agreeable with you, Judge? Judge BORK. Yes, it is, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. Good. You helped me out a lot there. What we
will do is we will break until 5 and then we will come back and we
will do at least two more rounds of questioning. The hearing is recessed until 5.
The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order. We left off with
Senator Thurmond and now it is Senator Kennedy's opportunity to
question. Senator Kennedy. Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge
Bork, I wanted to pick up, for a moment, one aspect of the line of
questioning of the Chairman. As I understand your discussion of
the Griswold case, your view is that there is no right to privacy in
the Constitution. It is up to the legislature. Doesn't that lead you to
the view that you would uphold a statute requiring say, compulsory abortion, if a legislature enacted it by majority? Let me just continue. Some of your strongest supporters have
made an issue of the allegation that there may be compulsory abortion in the People's Republic of China. As I understand it, under
your peculiar constitutional philosophy, you would be prepared to
uphold compulsory abortion in America if some future legislature
enacted it. We have just heard you say that the State of Connecticut had the right to pass a law prohibiting married couples from
using birth control. I think the real question is, Where do you draw the line? I think
you have opened up a whole can of worms, quite frankly, here.
What about a State statute that says families with more than two
children cannot send their children to public schools? What about
all sorts of other statutes that a legislature might enact with some
theoretically-plausible rationale, such as the Connecticut statute,
but which would obviously violate the people's most fundamental
rights, including the right to privacy? I believe, Mr. Bork, that in your world, the individuals have precious few rights to protect them against the majority and I think
this is where the Bill of Rights comes in and what the Bill of
Rights is all about, that there are some things in America which
no majority can do to the minority or to the individuals. The provisions of the 14th amendment under section 1, include "nor shall
any State deprive any person of life, liberty or property without
the due process of law." Isn't included in the concept of liberty, the right to privacy? In
reading that term with the ninth amendment, which provides that
"the enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people," I would be interested in your reaction or response because it seems
to me that the issues of privacy have been carefully enshrined
within the Constitution by court decisions over the period of the
last 60 years. They are rights which are enshrined in such a way and respected
and valued so importantly that I would think Americans would
have serious questions, I certainly do, about placing someone on
the Supreme Court that is willing to find some kind of a rationale,
or appears to find some rationale, not to respect it. Judge BORK. Senator Kennedy, at the outset let me say this. I have the greatest respect for the Bill of Rights and I will enforce
the Bill of Rights. I have enforced the Bill of Rights. What we were
talking about here was a generalized, undefined right of privacy
which is not in the Bill of Rights. Now, as I said in my opening
statement, a judge has to apply the law and the law comes from
the text, the history and the structure of the Constitution. There are important aspects of privacy in the Bill of Rights. This
Congress has increased privacy in many ways by statute. As a society, we value it, but as a judge, I do not think I can tell the American people they may not have a law that in no way conflicts with
the written and historical Constitution. Now, you raise the question of Senator KENNEDY. I want you to complete your answer. What I was really springing from is your response to the chairman's questions with regard to the Griswold. We remember that the majority
in that case found that the provisions in a State statute that restricted married couples from using contraception would be violative of their right to privacy. You've indicated that you took issue
with the rationale. I think you continued and said, well, perhaps someone can come
up with a different rationale so that you might be able to reach a
different decision. But in response, I think, to the chairman's question, you talked about the importance of the majority in the State
legislatures. You did not find, at least at this time, that you were
prepared to state a philosophy or legal justification for the overruling of that Connecticut statute. I believe, quite frankly, following
that rationale, that you could lead yourself into the kinds of situations which I've posed here. If I am wrong, I would like to hear
from you on that. Judge BORK. Well, let me repeat about this created, generalized
and undefined right of privacy in Griswold. Aside from the fact
that the right was not derived by Justice Douglas, in any traditional mode of constitutional analysis, there is this. The right was
not—we do not know what it is. We do not know what it covers. It
can strike at random. For example the Supreme Court has not applied the right of privacy consistently and I think it is safe to predict that the Supreme Court will not. For example, if it really is a right of sexual freedom in private,
as some people have suggested, then Bowers v. Hardwick, which
upheld a statute against sodomy as applied to homosexuals, is
wrongly decided. Privacy to do what, Senator? You know, privacy
to use cocaine in private? Privacy for businessmen to fix prices in a
hotel room? We just do not know what it is.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, there are some things that people would
understand—they would feel that government intrusion, in terms of
the married couple in the Griswold case, in terms of their use of
contraceptives, did go across that line; and in the kind of examples
that I have given you, it would seem to me that that would be equally
clear, that a State statute that required compulsory abortion would
certainly violate what I think most Americans would feel would be
the right to privacy. And I believe as well that, once you have the State dictating the size of families, it would do so as well.
What I am interested in is how you reach that conclusion, if that would be the conclusion, under your rationale, that if a State has
got a majority and it has got a basis for passing that statute, then it is not up to Judge Bork to look behind that.
Judge BORK. It is not up to Judge Bork to look behind that unless he has got law to apply. I was going to say, furthermore,
that I do not think—I have never found it terribly useful, in testing
constitutional theories, to use examples that we know the American people will never enact. The founders of this nation banked a
good deal upon the good sense of the people, as well as upon the courts.
Senator KENNEDY. I would just say here, Judge Bork, that one State did enact such a law with regard to sterilization. One State
did with regards to sterilization and I think that that reaches the
same kind of abhorrence, in terms of what I would imagine most
Americans, and certainly the Court did, would find abhorrent. I do
 
not think that our Founding Fathers might have imagined that as
well. But I think you have made the point. I would be glad to give you further time on it.
Judge BORK. Well, if you want to talk about Skinner v. Oklahoma—
Senator KENNEDY. I was basically interested, rather than getting
into the cases, just to get at the rationale, the reasoning, the way
that you do move to reach a decision. Let me go to the issues of equality.
I think most Americans are proud that our Supreme Court, for its leadership in the past 30 years in securing the promise of equal
justice under law for all Americans, for striking down the Jim
Crow laws, vindicating the right to vote, and prohibiting discrimi­nation against women.
The Court has helped to bring to an end the reign of prejudice and, I think, create a better America. You have written a great
deal, over the years, about legislation and court decisions designed
to ensure equal justice under law and I would like to examine some
of these views. Perhaps the most significant moral test of the country in this
century occurred in the struggle to end race discrimination. I appreciate your support for the school desegregation decision in 1954,
but I am troubled because I believe that your clock on civil rights
seems to have stopped in 1954. You opposed the passage of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, which prohibited discrimination in public accommodations and employment.
The terrible burden of segregation in that period was described
by Attorney General Robert Kennedy, in his testimony before this
committee in support of the Civil Rights Act of 1963, I just quote very briefly, "Consider also the enumerable difficulties that face a
Negro just travelling from State to State in our country, something
the rest of us have taken for granted. He makes a reservation in
advance. They may not be honored. If he seeks accommodations
along the way, he's likely to be rejected time after time until, just
to obtain lodging and food, he must detour widely from his route,
and if he does find accommodations available to him, they are likely to be inferior."
That was the reality in America in 1963. That was the evil that the Civil Rights Act was intended to prohibit, but, Mr. Bork, you
did not just criticize, you harshly criticized, the public accommodations provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 in your 1963 "New
Republic" article, printed rather interestingly in August of 1963 at
the time of Dr. King's march to Washington, where he stirred the nation.
In your "New Republic" article, you referred to the principle un­derlying those provisions as "a principle of unsurpassed ugliness."
And then in your article of March 1, 1964, in the Chicago Tribune,
you also expressed your opposition to the public accommodations
provision and to the title of the proposed Civil Right Act that
would end discrimination in employment as well. Isn't that cor­rect?
Judge BORK. I do not recall about the employment, Senator. I wonder if I might have a copy of those two pieces? Senator KENNEDY. Sure. I will ask the staff to get those. Do you
remember, or you do not remember, the use of words "a principle of unsurpassed ugliness."
Judge BORK. I remember that. I also remember, Senator, that I said that racial segregation, by law, was also of unsurpassed ugliness. Well, let me back up and tell you how this article came about and why
Senator KENNEDY. Let me just frame the question, if those quotes are correct, about when you first publicly changed your position on the Civil Rights Act. That would be the question. Given
the two articles which you offered in 1963 and in 1964, when did you first publicly change your position on the Civil Rights Act?
Judge BORK. I do not know if I did it in the classroom or not. I know that the first time Senator KENNEDY. Publicly. Judge BORK. Well, publicly. Senator KENNEDY. Publicly, you have written two important declarations. I think we are entitled to know if you were prepared to
make those comments in public. I would be interested in when you
made some public comment or statement. I think our friend from
Pennsylvania indicated you had made many speeches all during
this period of time and I would be interested in when you might be
able to indicate to us that you changed your position on the Civil Rights Act.
Judge BORK. Well, I think it is implicit in some of the things that I wrote earlier, but I first said it, I think, where it was written down at least, in a confirmation hearing in 1973. But, one has to know the evolution of my thinking about political matters to un­derstand where that article came from and why I no longer agree with it and have not agreed with it for a long time.
One has also to know that as Solicitor General, I enforced the
rights of racial minorities, in court, often further than the Supreme Court was willing to go. You should also know, Senator, that
on my present court, I have frequently voted for black plaintiffs in various kinds of civil rights or voting rights cases.
Senator KENNEDY. Just on this point—as Solicitor General, you are really representing your client, are you not? Are you not repre­senting the United States in those cases?
Judge BORK. I am indeed. Indeed, I did not have to go that far if I did not want to. I think it is important to know how this came
about. I had come to Yale as an avid free market type. I had gotten
into classical economics, which teaches that by and large, it is
much better to let people arrange their own affairs and their own
transactions than to try to govern them by law. I made, what I now
regard as a not uncommon intellectual mistake of trying to apply
those principles to social interactions. I do not think it works there because you have not got a marketplace to discipline people.
But, it is not uncommon for free market economists to display libertarian principles. This article came about because I was arguing with Alex Bickel about this subject. I, at that time, thought
that any coercion of the individual by government, had to be justified by a principle that did not lead government into all kinds of
coercion that should not be there and I could not see a general philosophical principle here that justified this coercion.
I also could not see a general philosophical principle that would justify segregation by law. I was leaning on the side of individual
freedom. I think that was wrong because I do not think any general principle is available. I now take what I would call—at least
what Bickel described as—the Edmund Burke approach, which is,
you look at each measure—this is a political matter, not a judicial
matter—you look at each measure and ask whether it will do more good than harm.
Had I looked at the civil rights proposals in that way, I would have, as I later came to, recognize that they do much more good. In
fact, they make everybody much happier and they help bring the nation together in a way that otherwise would not have occurred.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, the point, I believe, is a simple one. At a time when men and women in the South and North, Republicans
and Democrats, recognized that race discrimination had to be out­lawed in America, you strongly and publicly opposed civil rights legislation, calling its underlying principle one of "unsurpassed ug­liness." It was not until 10 years later, when you were nominated to be Solicitor General, that you publicly repudiated those views.
Judge BORK. Senator, I do not usually keep issuing my new opin­ions every time I change my mind. I just do not. If I re-visit the
subject, I re-visit it, but I do not keep issuing looseleaf services about my latest state of mind.
Senator KENNEDY. The point that I would make here is that you felt it was sufficiently important to publish your views at a time
when we were having a national debate in the early part of the
1960's on civil rights legislation. We were having a national debate
in 1968 on the whole issue of fair housing. We were having a national debate in 1972 on other civil rights legislation and you did
not feel, even though these were matters that were right before the American people and the Congress of the United States, sufficiently aroused in terms of your altered or changed views, that you
were prepared to publish those views. I would just say I wish you
had been as quick to publicize your change of heart as you were to
broadcast your opposition. Judge BORK. Well, the broadcasting of the opposition took place
entirely because I got into an argument with Alex Bickel. He wrote
frequently for the "New Republic" and he asked me to write it up.
I must say that when he saw it, he said, your article is a version of
liberal thought. Let me say one other thing. The concern about the
rights of liberty, as well as equality, was by no means an unusual
one then. When Congress came to face the fair housing laws, Congress began to make exceptions for Mrs. Murphy's boardinghouse
because they were worried about coercing the individual in that
way. A few years after I wrote this article, Justice Harlan dissented in
a lunch counter sit-in case, talking about the freedom of the individual and the rights of equality as being competing constitutional
considerations. I think I was wrong there. I do not think I was in
bad company, with Justice Harlan and this Congress, but those are
serious matters and it is no small thing to coerce generally. Now, I was afraid that the principle of this legislation could lead
to coercion of association everywhere. I now realize that we legislate partially and never legislate on a general principle so that
there is no danger that this kind of thing would expand into other
areas of coercion. Senator KENNEDY. Were you not worried about the coercion that
was happening to the blacks in this country because of lack of opportunity for equal employment? Were you not equally concerned
about that type of coercion, Judge Bork? Judge BORK. YOU mean private coercion? Senator KENNEDY. Yes. Judge BORK. Sure. Senator KENNEDY. Public, as well as governmental activities. Judge BORK. Well, governmental activity, I said in this article,
was wrong. If you segregate by race, I said that was a principle of
unsurpassed ugliness, too, and you will read my writings from beginning to end and you will never find a mark of racial of ethnic
hostility and you will find consistent support for some Senator KENNEDY. I was talking about the coercion that comes in
public accommodations, at lunch counters, in hotels, in those places
which I illustrated before. I wish, quite frankly, you had demonstrated as much concern about the coercion that was happening to
those black citizens that were being coerced as you apparently
were concerned about others. Let me go to the issue of poll taxes. The right to vote is the cornerstone of a free society. For decades poll taxes were used to keep
poor Americans, often of racial minorities, from exercising the
franchise. In Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections, which was decided in 1966, the Supreme Court struck down the poll tax because
it deprived poor Americans of equal protection of the laws by barring them from exercising their fundamental right to vote.
In its majority opinion the court stated: "Wealth or fee paying
has, in our view, no relation to voting qualifications. The right to vote is too precious, too fundamental to be so burdened or conditioned." Judge Bork, is it not true that in your confirmation hearings to
be Solicitor General in 1973 you testified that you thought that
Harper, and I quote, "as an equal protection case seemed to be
wrongly decided. "You were asked whether as far as the welfare of the nation was
concerned the Harper case was correctly decided. Am I correct that
you answered, "I do not really know about that. As I recall it was a
very small poll tax. It was not discriminatory and I doubt it had
much impact on the welfare of the nation one way or the other." And then you were asked about the constitutional issue, and you
responded, "I think that is a question of degree. It depends on the
size of the poll tax." Do you remember? Is that accurate? Judge BORK. AS I recall it, Senator, yes. Senator KENNEDY. NOW, am I correct that in 1985, in your forward to The Constitution and Contemporary Theory, you again
suggested the Supreme Court had been wrong to strike down the
poll tax in the Harper case? Judge BORK. Sir, I am willing to discuss that case, fully, Senator. Senator KENNEDY. I am just wondering if you have changed your
view that the Supreme Court was wrong in the Harper case to hold
that poll taxes are unconstitutional? Judge BORK. I think it was, and I will tell you why, and I have
no desire to bring poll taxes back into existence. I do not like them
myself. But if that had been a poll tax applied in a discriminatory
fashion, it would have clearly been unconstitutional. It was not. I
mean, there was no showing in the case. It was just a $1.50 poll
tax. This Congress had just recently drafted and proposed to the
States and had adopted an anti-poll tax amendment to the Constitution which this Congress carefully limited to federal elections so
as to leave State poll taxes in place if States chose to have them.
That seemed to me a little odd, therefore, that the Court would
come along and mop up something that Congress did not bother to
amend the Constitution to accomplish. Not did not bother; deliberately did not. The poll tax was familiar in American history and nobody ever
thought it was unconstitutional unless it was racially discriminatory. Now, in Harper itself Justice Black—who was hardly a man
who was insensitive to voting rights—Justice Harlan and Justice
Stewart all dissented from the majority holding. Justice Black said
the Court was using the old natural law due process formula to
write into the Constitution notions of what it thinks is good government policy. Harper overruled a prior case in which the majority had upheld
the poll tax and in that case Justices Black, Frankfurter, Jackson
and others upheld the poll tax. Archibald Cox has said, and I
quote, "the opinion seems almost perversely to repudiate every conventional guide to legal judgment," although he liked the result. I
like the result too. I just do not see the legal judgment there.
Alexander Bickel made much the same criticism. It is a decision
that is hard to square with out constitutional history.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, it was not only on the basis of race. It
was also on the question of discrimination against the poor. I
remember very well, because I offered that amendment on the
Voting Rights Act. I suppose the question is, how high a price should
a poor person have to be able to pay to exercise the fundamental
right to vote. You and I may not have to worry about where each
dollar goes but there are a lot of Americans who do. To suggest that a
poll tax, if it is small enough, does not deprive a poor person of a
fundamental aspect of citizenship, well that reminds me of Anatole
France's famous remark that "the law in its majestic equality forbids the rich as well as the poor to sleep under bridges and to beg
in the streets and to steal bread." The oath every judge and justice takes requires them to do equal
right to the poor as well as to the rich. I just think we have to be sensitive to the realities, not just legal technicalities.
Let me go to one man, one vote. In years past, one of the great obstacles to real democratic representation in the country occurred
when State legislatures apportioned themselves in ways that systematically reduced the voting strength of particular constituencies, drawing election districts with different size populations to
enable some groups to maintain more of their share of power at the expense of others.
Judge Bork, in the Reynolds v. Sirns case back in 1964, the Su­preme Court held that the Constitution requires election districts
in States and localities to be apportioned in a way that meets the
one man, one vote standard so that each legislative district con­tains roughly equal population.
Is it not true that in 1968 you wrote in Fortune Magazine, and I quote: "On no reputable theory of constitutional adjudication was there an excuse for the doctrine it imposed."
Judge BORK. I think, Senator, I not only wrote that, I still think I was right, and I will discuss it with you. For one, we might start off by observing that the Senate of the
United States would be an unconstitutional body if that rationale of one man, one vote were applied here.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, that is entirely different, as you are too good a professor not to understand. There was a different requirement agreed to at the time the Constitution was adopted, and that
was the New Jersey Plan and that was accepted by the Founding
Fathers, and that is a different kind of situation and you know that as well.
Judge BORK. That is entirely true. On the other hand, the reason for allowing certain units to have equal votes, even though their
populations are not equal, applies as well in a State legislature or
State senate as it does here. But passing that, it should be said that
I agreed with Baker v. Carr, which was the case which first held—
over the dissent of Justices Frankfurter and Harlan—which first
held that the courts could get into reapportionment. It was a subject matter they could take up. I agreed with that because the legislature in that case was so mal-apportioned that a majority of the
voters had no opportunity to get a new apportionment plan.
Now, it should be said that my position was the position that
Justice Stewart took in Lucas v. Ji.Jf.th General Assembly in dissent.
There you had a reapportionment plan with a State senate based on counties, I believe, which had been adopted by a referendum with a majority vote in every county in the State.
Justice Stewart wrote, and I explicitly agree with it, that a State should be free to apportion as it sees fit, so long as the apportion­ment plan has rationality and so long as a majority has a way to change the apportionment whenever it wants to. That seems to be my point, and I must say it is a point that has been agreed to by a great number of law professors.
There is nothing in our constitutional history that suggests one man, one vote is the only proper way of apportioning. There is nothing in our political theory. Indeed, the executive veto, the com­mittee system, districting, all of those things are really inconsistent with one man, one vote.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, I must say that you have indicated that position that you have expressed here on many different occasions. You said in 1973 before the Congress one man, one vote "was too much of a straightjacket" and that you, quote, "did not think that there is a theoretical basis for it." And then you indicated on June 10th of this year, you said in an interview, "well, I think this Court stepped beyond its allowable boundaries when it imposed one man, one vote under the equal protection clause."
I think the people of this country, Judge Bork, accept the funda­mental principle of one man, one vote even though they are not burdened with a law school education.
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, if the people of this country accept one man, one vote, that is fine. They can enact it any time they want to. I have no desire to go running around trying to overturn that decision. But as an original matter, it does not come out of anything in the Constitution and if the people of the country want it, they can adopt that apportionment any time they want to.
Senator KENNEDY. Judge Bork, I do not think you have to be a law professor to know a little about simple justice. After hearing you just on these issues—we will get into others during the course of our hearing—the bottom line is clear: When it counted you op­posed the key provisions of the Civil Rights Act banning race dis­crimination in employment, in public accommodation, and you did not publicly repudiate your opposition for some 10 years.
You criticized the Supreme Court's decision banning the enforce­ment of racially restricted covenants. In a response to earlier ques­tions you said you could not find a rationale about how you would be able to continue banning those
Judge BORK. Senator, may I correct that? I said that decision stands. Nobody is going to overturn it, but it is fortunate the ra­tionale upon which it was decided was not extended to other things because it would have made the courts the ultimate legislature on all private relationships in our society. I think a vast majority of professors who have examined that have agreed.
Senator KENNEDY. I did not hear this afternoon the rationale about how those racially restricted covenants could be struck down.
Judge BORK. I argued against racially restricted contracts in Runyon v. McCrary under Section 1981 and won the case. They can be struck down that way. Congress has struck them down, as I un­derstand it, in the Fair Housing Law as well, which is fine, is good.
Senator KENNEDY. But you disagreed with the Supreme Court decision striking down the poll tax which prevented poor people from
exercising their fundamental right to vote; and you also opposed
the Supreme Court decision upholding the one man, one vote principle which requires that every citizen's vote be counted equally.
With all your ability, I just wish you had devoted even a little of
your talent to advancing equal rights rather than criticizing so
many of the decisions protecting rights and liberties. Lawyers can always make technical points, but a justice ought to
be fair. Judge BORK. Senator Kennedy, I do not think your characterization of one man, one vote as a civil liberties case is correct. In fact,
I think it is the opposite. But we can discuss that at greater length. The CHAIRMAN. If you would like to go on, because the Senator
has more time, also. Judge BORK. He has more time? I thought he was summing up. The CHAIRMAN. I think he was. I am not suggesting he should go
on, which he can, because his time is not up. My point is, anytime you feel you want to expand on an answer,
you are not bound by the time, so you just go on any time you wish
to expand on an answer. That is my point. Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman, I might note just on that last one,
just as Judge Bork left it, I, for one would find it very helpful to
hear an expansion on his last sentence. Judge BORK. On one man, one vote, Senator? The CHAIRMAN. Whatever you were going to say. The whole
point is, Judge, any time you want to say anything, just go ahead. Senator LEAHY. I wish you would. I understood you to say you
did not see it as a civil liberties case but quite the opposite and I
would just be interested to hear the explanation. Judge BORK. Well, for this reason Senator, let us talk about a
State like Colorado, all of whose—not all of—the majority of whose
citizens in every county want a State senate structured like the
federal Senate. Why is it an advancement of civil liberties to say
they cannot have it. I think it cuts into the liberties of the voters
who want to have a senate structured in that way. But more fundamentally, you cannot apply the principle of one man, one vote
across the board unless you think that we could do away with the
committee systems, we could do away with the executive veto, we
could do away with districting instead of at-large elections, and so
forth and so on. These points are all made with great precision in advance of the
Court adopting the point in Dean Phil C. Neils article in the Supreme Court Review that came out just about a year before the
Reynolds case, I guess, and was made at great length. Nobody
doubts that an apportionment which is discriminatory can be
struck down. Nobody doubts that an apportionment which a majority cannot change should be struck down. The only question is
whether this rigid formula is good or not.
And let me tell you one other thing, Senator. For my sins I was
approached by a three-judge district court in Connecticut and said
they had just struck down the plan put in by the legislature and
would I serve as a special master to redistrict Connecticut. I said,
Judge Blumenfeld, I have just written that one man, one vote is a fiasco—and that was my word, I am afraid—but I will do it. I will
follow the rules if you want me to do it that way, despite the fact
that I have written that, and he said, yes. So I then went out and got all of the census tracks and began to
try to remake Connecticut. Well, I was not too well received up in
Hartford because when I went into the legislatures they were terrified it was a Yale professor with a beard that they had never heard
of before. I remember they looked at a map on the wall and said
somewhat caustically, that is Connecticut, professor. And I said, for
now.  But I did it. I did it on a one man, one vote basis and within 1
percent deviation from district to district, which means you have
got to cut town lines and carve communities up in the strangest
ways. And I did it blind, just on the numbers without any understanding of the political impact and I first understood the political
impact when I went up to testify at the hearing. I went to a restaurant without being told it was the Democratic parties hangout. I
was sitting there eating when a man I did not know came up and
said, that is a wonderful plan, professor; you are a good man; my
name is John Bailey, Democratic national committeeman. He was
chairman of the Democratic national committee. Well, the court accepted my plan and the Republicans appealed.
But I know from that experience just how artificial one man, one
vote leads you to be in cutting up communities and natural groups
and so forth. A little more leeway in the apportionment rules,
which—as a matter of fact in that case the Court came to allow
more leeway so that it is not one man, one vote in state elections
anymore. And I think that was a good relaxation. Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, I do not know how much time
I have. The CHAIRMAN. Senator, you had 5 minutes remaining. Senator KENNEDY. Just one final area. On the issue of sex discrimination, Judge Bork, as you know, the equal protection clause
of the 14th amendment prohibits a state from denying any person
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. You said
this afternoon that your statement that the equal protection clause
does not apply to women came in your Indiana Law Journal article. Judge BORK. DO you have a page citation there, Senator? Senator KENNEDY. Excuse me? Judge BORK. DO you have a page citation? Senator KENNEDY. Which? Of the Indiana Law Journal? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator KENNEDY. Page 17. I am glad to move along just in
terms of the concept. I am not going to stop here. I want to get to
the broader question in terms of the test, so I will go beyond the—I
am not looking for the quote here, just to mention that as the Indiana Journal.
Judge BORK. I was just trying to find that statement. Senator KENNEDY. YOU had said that cases of racial discrimination aside, it is always a mistake for the Court to try and construct
substantive individual rights under the due process clause—or the
equal protection clause.
If I could just go on, there is something else I am driving at.
Is it not true that in an interview with United States Information Agency in June of this year, 10 years after the Court applied a
rigorous standard test to sex discrimination, you said, and I quote, "I
do think the equal protection clause probably should have been kept to things like race and ethnicity."
This is after the Supreme Court changed its basic test. It is clear from your public comments as recently as 3 months ago that you
disapprove of the Supreme Court's recognition in the past 10 years
that laws which discriminate on the basis of sex must be subject to
heightened scrutiny under the 14th amendment. Because under the
rational basis test, the Supreme Court upholds a classification if it
is rationally related to any government interest. That is a very lenient standard used by the courts in judging routine economic reg­ulations that treat different persons and businesses differently.
That distinction was mentioned by the Chairman. In 1976, the Supreme Court rejected the rational basis test and applied a stricter standard for sex discrimination. And yet, in June of this year,
you said that decision trivialized the Constitution. In this day and
age men and women stand equal before the law. Women are first-
class citizens, Mr. Bork, and your views would take us back to the
days when women were second-class citizens and the Supreme Court winked at discrimination and denied equal rights for women.
Judge BORK. Well, let me talk about that, Senator. In looking at the 14th amendment, race is the paradigm case. Race is the core of
the amendment. That is what the post-Civil War amendments were
basically aimed at. They wanted to help and prevent discrimination against the newly freed slaves. And of course, race and ethnicity that is the way the amendment was applied for a long time. It was applied to Chinese Americans in Yick Wo v. Hopkins.
At least for the last 90 years, roughly, the Court has also been doing two things. It has been using a reasonable basis test, but it
has also engaged in the activity you described, by saying this group is in under the 14th amendment, that group is out.
Then they would develop multi-tier levels of scrutiny. That is, racial discrimination or distinction required strict scrutiny by the
courts and a compelling governmental interest. Gender began to
get intermediate scrutiny or something of that sort. I think that
approach is highly artificial and not sufficient. I think you do not
have to say this group is in, that group is out. You say that all persons are in, as the amendment does, and then you apply a reasona­ble basis test.
The reasonable basis test got a bad name because it simply is not applied with any degree of severity at all in the case of economic
cases, and maybe it should not be. Maybe those are interest group
politics cases. But if you look at—ask yourself whether a reasonable basis for distinction exists, the answer will be in a race case,
almost never; in a gender case you will get something that resembles intermediate scrutiny, but you do not have to go through putting groups in and out and you do not have to have different tiers
of scrutiny.
And indeed, I think Justice Stevens made a similar point, or
maybe the same point, in a recent opinion of his. It gives women—
women were not thought of as protected in particular when the
14th amendment was applied. There was a lot of what we now call discrimination against women which seemed to them a very natural way for civilization to be organized. But as the culture changes
and as the position of women in society changes, those distinctions
which seemed reasonable now seem outmoded stereotypes and they seem unreasonable and they get struck down.
That is the way a reasonable basis test should be applied.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, the point as I see it, Judge Bork, is that
talking about the rational basis test, it was the test the Supreme
Court used for a 100 years to deny equality for women. Some years
ago the Court altered that to a rigorous standard for sex discrimination. As I understand the rational basis test, it is the same test
which is used in terms of economic regulations and pollution ordinances. You have restated earlier in your response to Chairman
Biden that this is still your test whereas the Court itself has moved to a much more rigorous standard to sex discrimination.
Judge BORK. I do not think in the case of gender, Senator, that my test—or what you call my test, which is a test the Court has
been applying in one way or another for 90 years—would come out that much different than an intermediate scrutiny standard.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, it was still the test that was used when women were discriminated against back in 1896. That was the
basis and I think you get a very substantial body of legal opinion,
plus the Justices, that believe that the test has been altered and
changed to a rigorous standard test and that does provide a great deal more protection to women.
What I hear you saying here now is that the test that was used about 90 years ago and which was the basis for discrimination
against women is the standard that you would use. You might be able to elaborate on it, but that is, at least, what I am hearing.
Judge BORK. I do not know that it was the basis for discrimina­tion against women. I think that society saw all kinds of distinctions, legal distinctions between men and women as entirely reasonable and rational. This society no longer sees them that way, and that is fine.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, I just will take 30 more seconds, Mr. Chairman. On numerous occasions over the last 16 years, Mr. Bork,
you have suggested the equal protection clause of the Constitution
does not ban discrimination against women. Now you are suggesting the Supreme Court should apply the same lax standard to sex
discrimination cases that it applies to challenges to air pollution ordinances or economic regulations.
You have also disapproved the equal rights amendment, and fi­nally you also suggested in a 1985 opinion that the Civil Rights Act
offers little if any protection against any one of the ugliest forms of
gender discrimination, individual sexual harassment on the job. We
have made great progress in the country in the last 20 years in
giving women equal status under law and I think the controversy
has largely been settled. But you would have the Supreme Court, evidently, roll back the clock and reopen old wounds.
Judge BORK. Senator, I think I must reply to that. I have never said anything about the ERA except that it seemed to me odd to
put all of the decisions about how women may be treated—what
they may do and what they may not do and so forth—into the
hands of judges without any guidelines from a legislative history or anything else. Had the ERA said, Congress may make such laws as it sees fit to remove gender inequality, I would have no objection.
My objection to ERA—which I never campaigned against, I just dropped a footnote someplace—was essentially the same as my ob­jection which I have voiced to this administration's balanced budget amendment. In one case you put all the relationships be­tween the sexes in the hands of judges where it should be in the hands of legislatures, except when it violates the Constitution. In the other case, you are going to put this government's finances in the hands of judges, or the budget in the hands of judges.
It does not seem to me that judges are fit for either of those tasks without a lot more guidance than either amendment gives them.
Senator KENNEDY. The point is, in a May 1974 Mayflower Hotel speech, you indicated that the fact that the adoption of ERA would ratify and forward a dangerous constitutional revolution is the one feature of it that is rarely if ever criticized.
Judge BORK. That is right. Senator KENNEDY. I would ask that the full speech be put in the record.
Senator HATCH. Judge, Senator Kennedy said when it counted
you were not there on some of these items, but I think what you
have been able to show here today is that these major issues are
not easily explained in 30-second bites that we people in Congress
are used to popping off about; is that correct? Judge BORK. Well, Senator, if you are suggesting that I have
proved that I cannot explain them, I do not want to accept that. It
is hard to discuss a complex issue in 30 seconds. That is correct. Senator HATCH. The fact of the matter is most of these are very
complex issues and there are people on both sides of them and they
do not particularly get stereotyped easily in conservative or liberal
categories.
Judge BORK. Senator, let me say something I should have said
before, and that is, I am willing to engage in an abstract discussion
of large principles and generic classes and so forth. However, when
you are a judge, the cases do not come to you that way. They come
in gray areas with difficult facts, and so forth. So I think this discussion is useful but it by no means is the way a judge goes about
his business. Senator HATCH. Well, what I am concerned about is the way
your record is being distorted, some of the inflammatory rhetoric;
some of the, I think, unuseful and really false methodology being
used; the inappropriate use of statistics, for instance, only examining cases where there is disagreement, which is only 14 percent of
your total case load; ignoring all of the other things that you have
done and ignoring what you stand for and using language like,
well, when it counted you were not there, because you have been
there. On restricted covenants, one of the big issues that has been
raised by your detractors or opponents, it is because you criticized
Shelley v. Kraemer. You were criticizing it because you questioned
the process—your main question was what was State action, is that
correct? Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HATCH. That's a very important legal issue, isn't it? Judge BORK. Yes. It's a crucial legal issue because Senator HATCH. YOU weren't for restricted covenants, were you? Judge BORK. I never have been. Senator HATCH. AS a matter of fact, as Solicitor General, you
argued against restricted covenants in the Runyon v. McCrary case,
is that correct? Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HATCH. Well, a lot of these are explained that way, if
you take the time to look into them and you don't just take 30second bites, and you look at it fairly and you treat these fairly. I
think that's what you're bringing across here today, is that literally these are complex cases; they aren't easy to decide. There are
legitimate viewpoints on both sides, and in almost every case that
you have given us today you have listed some of the most outstanding luminaries in the field of law, including former Supreme Court
Justices and sitting Supreme Court Justices with whom you agreed
and who agreed with you; is that right? Judge BORK. That is correct. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hatch, let me just make a comment.
Judge, do you feel you have been required to answer in 30-second
bites?
Judge BORK. No, but I think that's a temptation I sometimes fall into.
The CHAIRMAN. I just want to make it clear, you have as much time as you want. I literally mean that. If you want to take 20 min­utes to answer a single question, or an hour, you have the time.
Senator HATCH. I would like to be able to use my time.
The CHAIRMAN. NO, it will not be taken out of your time.
I just want you to know that, Judge. Do not feel at all con­strained. Take as much time as you want. Judge BORK. I think there's a natural tendency, knowing that a
Senator wants to go on with further question, not to bog him down with a long answer. I will try to get over that natural tendency. The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead and bog us down. We are trying to find out what you think, and you may use as much time as you want. Senator HATCH. Judge, you're doing very fine in your concise and cohesive answers. As a matter of fact, I don't see how anybody watching this could doubt that you're an eminent scholar, with a brilliant mind, who is in the mainstream of judicial life, who in sit­ting in more than 400 cases on the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia has never been reversed, who has been within the mainstream with his liberal colleagues on the Courts, if that's an appropriate term, as you have with your conservative col­leagues, having agreed 90 percent of the time with Judge Ruth
Bader Ginsburg, 83 percent of the time with Judge Mikya, right on down to Judge Skelly Wright around 75 percent of the time.
That doesn't sound to me like you're outside of the mainstream, since you're agreeing with your liberal colleagues. But they have
chosen in some of these critical articles to criticize you on 14 percent of your cases, where there is tremendous controversy. That's
unfair, and we have a tendency up here, as Senators, because we
don't have the time to go into the nuances of these cases as you
judges do, to look at everything in terms of 30-second bites for us on television. That's my point, not you.
Now, in recent years we have heard a great deal of commentary about the problems of judicial activism. How would you define judicial activism, because this seems to be really one of the central core matters here.
Judge BORK. I think I would define it as a judge reading into a statute or into the Constitution his personal policy preferences— and let me be clear about this.
No human being can sit down with words in a statute, with his­tory and the other evidence he uses, and not to some extent get his
personal moral view into it, because each of us sees the world, understands facts, through a lens composed of our morality and our
understanding.
But there is an enormous difference between that inevitable bias
that gets in and a judge who self-consciously tries to keep his
biases out and tries to be as impartial on the evidence as he can be.
There's an enormous difference between that and a judge who incorporates his idea of wise policy into the Constitution or into a
statute and, as a matter of fact, if you're familiar with the academic legal debate, most of those writing in the law schools these days
seem to prefer the latter kind of a judge, one who does not confine
himself to the historical principles of the Constitution. Senator HATCH. In other words, in simple terms, judicial activism
is when judges make law rather than interpret the law? Judge BORK. That is a good shorthand description. Senator HATCH. The fact of the matter is that you, as a federal
judge, weren't elected to that position; is that right? Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HATCH. You're not elected to make laws. Judge BORK. I'm not. If I were, if I were going to make laws, then this hearing should consist of me making campaign promises on how I will vote on various cases. Senator HATCH. That's what these hearings will be if we contin­ue to politicizeJudge BORK. I'm afraid of that. Senator HATCH. This may occur as well when judges make a gen­eral statement of law and stretch it to cover instances beyond that which the authors really intended; is that right? Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HATCH. And that's what you mean by original intent? Judge BORK. That's correct. Senator HATCH. And it doesn't just mean original intent of the Founding Fathers or the original meaning of what they meant; it means the original intent of us Members of Congress who are elect­ed representatives to make these laws to the people, is that right? Judge BORK. That is correct, Senator. Senator HATCH. NOW, I realize that you have been long known as a most eloquent, consistent and brilliant exponent of the classic theory of judicial restraint. What is meant by judicial restraint? Judge BORK. It means that a judge—I've never liked the word ju­dicial activism. I prefer something else. Because a restrained judge should be active in defending those freedoms and powers that are actually in the Constitution—should give them liberal construction. But he should not go beyond that, and that is judicial restraint. It is the morality of the jurist who self-consciously renounces power and tries to enforce the will of the lawmaker. Senator HATCH. When courts read into the Constitution or par­ticular pieces of legislation policies and rights that are not there, what happens to the ability of the legislatures of the respective States or of the Congress itself to make laws according to the needs of the people? Judge BORK. The people and their representatives have suddenly
been ousted from an area that was legitimately theirs and the
courts begin to set a social agenda instead of the people setting
their social agenda.Senator HATCH. When I talk about judicial activism, you don't like the term, but let me at least use that term because we have
defined it here. Judge BORK. All right. I'll accept it. Senator HATCH. Can judicial activism be employed just as easily
as conservative—to reach illegitimate conservative as well as illegitimate liberal end results?
Judge BORK. Up until the mid-1980s, as we all know, Senator, a
conservative majority on the Supreme Court was reading its eco­nomic preferences into the Constitution.
Senator HATCH. That's why we had the child labor laws in the Lochner era and all those difficulties. Judge BORK. Labor laws were being struck down, laws protecting
workers were being struck down. That changed. I don't think activism is any more proper for a conservative than it is for a liberal.
That's why I don't think my philosophy of judging has anything to do with liberalism or conservatism.
Senator HATCH. The thing that is interesting to me is that you have a reputation for being squarely against both forms of judicial activism.
I remember—and I sat there in the hearings when you testified against the so-called human life bill, or human life amendment.
That bill basically would have allowed the Congress of the United
States to overrule Roe v. Wade by simple statute. You came in and testified against that. Why?
Judge BORK. Because I think it is unconstitutional for the Con­gress to try to change a Supreme Court decision by statute. It has
been allowed once or twice by the Supreme Court, but I don't think it's proper.
I criticized Roe v. Wade at that time, but I also opposed any effort to change it by statute or to take away the Supreme Court's jurisdiction over the subject.
Senator HATCH. I agree with you. At the time I voted to put it out of subcommittee, but I was going to vote against it in full committee but it never came up again, and it was precisely because of
your arguments that it was basically defeated. I don't think conservatives are any more justified in trying to impose their conserv­ative activism than liberals are in the courts.
Now, in this context, I think it is helpful to re-examine this case for a few minutes, Griswold v. Connecticut. And this case, as you
defined it, was when the Supreme Court invalidated a Connecticut law banning the use of contraceptives.
In the first place, do you, as a personal matter, have anything against the use of contraceptives of the personal choice of individ­uals to use them or not?
Judge BORK. Nothing whatsoever. I think the Connecticut law was an outrage and it would have been more of an outrage if they ever enforced it against an individual.
Senator HATCH. But they never did.
Judge BORK. NO.
Senator HATCH. YOU will not be surprised to know that your per­sonal feelings about the Connecticut law are similar to those of Justice Hugo Black, the primary dissenter in the Griswold case. He said, "I feel constrained to add that the law is every bit as offensive to me as it is to my brethren in the majority." Nonetheless, Justice Black, who certainly was one of the great all time Justices in our age, who was joined by Justice Stewart, whose wonderful wife is here with us today—and, of course, he was another judicial giant, in my opinion—they both dissented in that case.
Now, can you explain why these great jurists could have allowed
that law banning contraceptives to stand?
Judge BORK. Justice Stewart called it an uncommonly silly law,
which I think it certainly was, at a minimum. I think they would
have allowed it to stand simply because they could find no warrant
in the Constitution for them, as judges, to override a legislative enactment. Senator HATCH. In other words, there was no source of authority
within the Constitution to rule the way they ruled?
Judge BORK. That is what they concluded. Senator HATCH. SO these two principal jurists, both of whom decided the particular law, agreed with you—or should I say you
agreed with them?
Judge BORK. I think the latter is the better form, Senator. Senator HATCH. I can certainly understand that there is a privacy protection in the Constitution, in the sense of guarantees
against unreasonable searches of one's home, and the prohibition
of laws that abridge free speech and the free exercise of religion.
Those are areas where there is no question about the right of privacy, is there? Judge BORK. None whatsoever. Senator HATCH. But what did Justice Black say about the general right of privacy discussed in that case? Judge BORK. Well, as I recall, didn't he say it was the old natural
law theory of judging? You write your own policy prescriptions into
the statute. Senator HATCH. That's basically what he said. What did Justice Black say about the scope of the so-called privacy right that is no where found in the Constitution? Judge BORK. I think he said it was utterly unpredictable. I don't
recall his exact words, but nobody knows what the scope is. Senator HATCH. He indicated that it was incapable of being limited or defined, other than by arbitrary judicial fiat; isn't that correct? Judge BORK. That's true, and that is Senator HATCH. And that's what you were concerned about? Judge BORK. That's what I meant when I said that, you know,
privacy to do what? We don't know. Privacy to take cocaine in private; privacy to fix prices in private; privacy to engage in incest in
private? The Supreme Court is not going to do those things, but we
don't know why.
Senator HATCH. We all have to agree that privacy is a very attractive concept. We all want privacy, don't we? Judge BORK. We do. Senator HATCH. IS the legal doctrine in question here about the
kind of privacy we all desire, or is it actually a term used to deal
with some questions with very public implications?
Judge BORK. Well, it certainly deals with some cases with public
implications, that's right.
Senator HATCH. Once again, what would happen if judges began
to discover or create new rights in the Constitution, such as the
right to be let alone, or the right to be free of taxation, or the right
to a balanced budget?
Judge BORK. That's right. I remember some judges who sued
under the Constitution for the right to an indexed salary.
Senator HATCH. I agree that Judge BORK. And they quite properly lost. Senator HATCH. Actually, some of those rights would seem very
attractive. A right to be let alone. You know, some judge could just
say "well, we all ought to have that right", if he wanted to, but it
isn't in the Constitution. Judge BORK. Judging requires careful thought and the making of
close distinctions. Once you just put rhetoric into the constitutional
adjudication, you don't know where it will go or what it will do. Senator HATCH. What happens if the courts start creating rights
that are not found in the Constitution? Judge BORK. In my view, it's illegitimate. Senator HATCH. Well, we're going to be a government not of laws
but of the whimsies of the courts; isn't that right? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HATCH. Isn't that basically your criticism? Judge BORK. That's basically what I have been objecting to for 16
years, and throughout these hearings. Senator HATCH. It has got to be a little irritating to you as it has
to be to anybody who is fair-minded, to be criticized for having
criticized Griswold v. Connecticut on the grounds that you might
possibly have wanted to sustain that statute, any more than it was
the desire of Hugo Black or Mr. Justice Potter Stewart to have
done that. Judge BORK. It is, Senator, as you know, a regular form of rhetoric to say that, if you would say a statute is not unconstitutional,
that must be because you like the statute. That is not right. The
question is never whether you like the statute; the question is, is it
in fact contrary to the principles of the Constitution. Senator HATCH. I think I'm starting to understand why you have
never been reversed, Judge. I hope the people in this country are,
too, because you're right down the middle on these things. You just
want the laws to be made by elected representatives and the judges
to interpret those laws in accordance with appropriate constitutional application. Judge BORK. That is true, Senator. Senator HATCH. I don't know how anybody could find fault with
that. And in every one of these cases, I think when you get into the
complexities, I think the American people would basically say "I
might disagree with Judge Bork on the philosophy on some of
these cases, but I cannot disagree on the jurisprudence or the
actual application of law." I think most people would feel that way. By the way, this discussion leads to another important case governed by the so-called privacy doctrine, and that is the case of Roe
v. Wade. You have been criticized for having been critical of this
abortion case called Roe v. Wade.
Can you explain your apprehensions about this particular case?
Judge BORK. It is not apprehension so much, Senator, as it is—If
Griswold v. Connecticut established or adopted a privacy right on
reasoning which was utterly inadequate, and failed to define that
right so we know what it applies to, Roe v. Wade contains almost
no legal reasoning. We are not told why it is a private act—and if
it is, there are lots of private acts that are not protected—why this
one is protected. We are simply not told that. We get a review of
the history of abortion and we get a review of the opinions of vari­ous groups like the American Medical Association, and then we get rules.
That's what I object to about the case. It does not have legal rea­soning in it that roots the right to an abortion in constitutional materials.
Senator HATCH. Well, let me just say this.
By the way, I presume your concerns about the reasoning of the Roe v. Wade case do not necessarily mean that you would auto­matically reverse that case as a Justice of the Supreme Court?
Judge BORK. No. If you want to hear me on that, I will tell you exactly what I would consider.
Senator HATCH. We would be glad to hear it.
Judge BORK. If that case, or something like it, came up, and if the case called for a broad up or down, which it may not, I would first ask the lawyer who wants to support the right, "Can you derive a right of privacy, not to be found in one of the specific amendments, in some principled fashion from the Constitution so I know not only where you got it but what it covers."
There are rights that are not specifically mentioned in the Con­stitution, like the right to travel. You know, it's conceivable he could do that, I don't know. If he could not do that, I would say, "Well, if you can't derive a general right of privacy, can you derive a right to an abortion, or at least to a limitation upon anti-abortion statutes legitimately from the Constitution?"
If after argument, that didn't sound like it was going to be a viable theory, I would say to him, "I would like you to argue whether this is the kind of case that should not be overruled." Be­cause, obviously, there are cases we look back on and say they were erroneous or they were not compatible with original intent, but we don't overrule them for a variety of reasons.
A moment ago, in response to a question, I ran through some of the factors. So I would listen to that argument.
As I have said before, a judge with an original intent philosophy, which goes back, by the way, to Marshall and Joseph Story, needs a strong theory of precedent to keep from getting back into matters that are long settled, even if incorrectly settled.
Senator HATCH. So as a judge, you would have to take into con­sideration such factors as continuity, predictability of the law, facts of the case and so forth.
Would it be safe for me to assume, or members of this committee to assume, that you do not know yourself how you would rule on an abortion case if it came before the Supreme Court until you have all the facts?
Judge BORK. That is true. I have discovered that, to my chagrin, on my present court. You think you know something about a sub­ject, until you get the briefs and hear the argument and you decide it is much more complex than you thought it was. But I have tried to indicate the general factors that I would look at. There may be some lawyer that will suggest some that I haven't thought of.
Senator HATCH. I would also presume—and correct me if I'm wrong—that you have taken no public position on the political or social merits of abortion?
Judge BORK. The only position I have taken was the opposition to
the human life bill and the opposition to taking away the Supreme
Court's jurisdiction.
Senator HATCH. I think it would be helpful to examine the char­acter of the legal scholarship that has voiced apprehensions similar
to yours on this case, since you have been criticized by some of my
colleagues as being outside of the mainstream, because of your
criticisms of the so-called Roe v. Wade case. For example, Gerald Gunther of the Stanford Law School cites
Roe as an instance of the "bad legacy of substantive due process
and ends-oriented" judging. Professor Archibald Cox of Harvard notes that the "court failed
to establish the legitimacy of the decision by not articulating a precept of sufficient attractiveness to lift the ruling above the level of
a political judgment. "By the way, let's pause here. What do you suppose Archibald Cox
meant when he said that the decision was not legitimate? Judge BORK. I suppose he means it comes out of no—so far as he
can see—comes out of no legitimate constitutional materials, which
are primarily text, history and constitutional structure. Senator HATCH. DO you agree with that? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HATCH. Let's continue. Dean John Ely of Stanford, who
also favors abortion, says along with Archibald Cox "It is not a constitutional principle and the court has no business trying to impose
it." Professor Bickel, who I think is respected by almost everybody,
who is studied in the law, also criticized the Roe decision for being
legislation but not legal action. You're aware of that. In fact, this is
the very point made by Justices White and Rehnquist. In fact, in
later decisions, Justice O'Connor, the nation's first woman Justice,
also criticized harshly the Roe opinion. You could go on. Professor Forrester of Cornell calls the case
"interventionist", and Professor Kirland of Chicago calls it "a blatant usurpation". In your lengthy constitutional studies, is there any Supreme
Court decision that has stirred more controversy or criticism
amongst scholars and citizens than that particular case? Judge BORK. I suppose the only candidate for that, Senator,
would be Brown v. Board of Education. It is possible, you know, for
the Supreme Court to be— Senator HATCH. Or possibly the Bred Scott case. Judge BORK. Yes, that's right. Senator HATCH. Where there might be some parallels.
Judge BORK. But in my lifetime, those two. And it's possible for
the Supreme Court to be entirely right and get an enormous
amount of heat, and it's possible for it to be wrong and get an enormous amount of heat. So the controversy surrounding it isn't really
the way I judge the correctness of the decision.
Senator HATCH. That's right, and I think that's starting to come
across. I think that you're refuting your extraordinarily extreme
critics, which I think are misrepresenting, in their full-page ads
and a whole raft of other things what you stand for and what you
do as a judge.
In any event, it is clear to me, and I think to others that listen,
that your apprehensions about the reasoning of the Roe v. Wade
case are shared by some of the legal minds of our age on both sides of the issue.
Let me ask one further question on this case, however. If you are confirmed, and the abortion decision comes to you, will you describe how you would approach the case? I'm interested to know
whether or not you have already prejudged this issue or whether
you will keep an open mind with regard to the case that comes before you.
Judge BORK. I think I have listened to arguments in every case, Senator, and sometimes I don't think somebody is going to be able
to make it in an argument, and sometimes they do make it, despite my initial doubts.
But as I have mentioned to you, I would ask for a grounding of the privacy right and a definition of it in a traditional, constitutional reasoning way. As I say, if that can't be done, I will ask for a
rooting of the right to an abortion, or some right to an abortion of
some scope, in traditional, legal, constitutional materials. And if
that can't be done, then I would like to hear argument on stare decisis and whether or not this is the kind of case that should or should not be overruled.
Senator HATCH. I acknowledge that you have encountered only one case similar to Griswold and Roe—in other words, the contraceptive case and the abortion case—on the D.C. Circuit, and that was the important Dronenberg v. Zech case.
Now, this is a case that is cited by your critics as evidence for your antipathy to the so-called right of privacy. Could you describe the facts of that case?
Judge BORK. That was a case in which the Navy discharged, hon­orably, I think it was a petty officer for engaging in homosexual
conduct in the barracks with a junior, subordinate. The Navy has a
regulation against homosexual conduct, not against the status of homosexuality, but against homosexual conduct in the service.
The discharged sailor sued, alleging, among other things, that he had a right of privacy to engage in homosexual conduct in the Navy, and that that flowed from Griswold and Roe.
Our panel of the court disagreed. We thought the right of priva­cy was relatively undefined, but we saw no principle in the Supreme Court's jurisprudence on the subject which would lead us to tell the Navy it could not ban that kind of conduct.
Later the Supreme Court, in Bowers v. Hardwick, upheld a much more severe regulation. After all, all we said was that the Navy
was entitled to discharge this fellow honorably. In Bowers v. Hardwick, they allowed the criminalizing of civilian homosexual con­duct, which is a much larger step than we took.
Senator HATCH. Your holding in that case was basically merely a finding that the doctrine of privacy could not be expanded to cover
consensual sodomy; is that right?
Judge BORK. That's correct.
Senator HATCH. And as I understand it, there was unanimous consensus or agreement by the three-judge panel?
Judge BORK. That's correct.
Senator HATCH. Who were the other two judges besides yourself?
Judge BORK. Judge Scalia, and I think it was Judge Williams
from the ninth circuit—is that correct?
Senator HATCH. And you say that the Supreme Court later, in a
precisely similar case, upheld your particular point of view? Judge BORK. Yes. Well, it wasn't precisely similar. I think that
was a harder case for the court. Senator HATCH. You're talking about the Bowers v. Hardwick
case? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HATCH. Okay. But it was consistent, though Judge BORK. Oh, certainly. Senator HATCH. With your particular decision, is
that correct? Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HATCH. By the way, your critics like to state that you
wiped away selected Supreme Court decisions, by which they mean
you failed to follow the privacy doctrine when you ruled on the
Dronenberg case. But the Supreme Court didn't feel that way when
it wiped it away, too, in its decision. That's a majority of the
present Supreme Court, right? Judge BORK. Well, that s the trouble. It wasn't clear what the
privacy principle covered. So in deciding it did not cover homosexual conduct in the Navy, we didn't necessarily wipe away any
cases. We just said that we didn't see that the principle covers this
case. It is impossible for a Court of Appeals judge, or any one judge, to
wipe away Supreme Court cases. Senator HATCH. YOU decided one other case of a related issue,
and that was the Franz case. In that case, a woman was relocated
under the Federal Witness Protection Program. She and her children were given new identities in order to protect their lives. Of
course, the plaintiff in that case, Franz, was her ex-husband, and
he wanted to find out where they were. Now, that seems to me to be an extraordinary case. They were
given witness protection and he wanted to find out where they
were, and the competing interests are both very compelling in a
case like that—the right of the husband to see his children, and
the right of the wife to be protected from disclosure. Could you give me your reasoning in that case? Judge BORK. Senator, as I recall that case—and I haven't read it
for a long time—I think that I was concerned that we were being
asked to apply a constitutional principle, asked to create a constitutional principle, when I didn't think Congress had faced the issue. I
wanted Congress to face the issue before we did, which seems to me
to be always appropriate, because the legislature, when it becomes
aware of the problem, may make all kinds of adjustments and so
forth to the problem, so that it is not necessary for a judge to begin
to apply the Constitution. I was convinced that Congress had not faced that problem, so I
proposed to say that Pennsylvania domestic relations law probably
interfered with what was done, that that gave this fellow a right to
see his children, and that Congress had not preempted Pennsylvania domestic relations law, had shown no desire to. I wanted in
that way to send the case back so that the Congress would have to decide whether or not it wished to preempt domestic relations law
and do what was, after all, a very drastic thing. That was my position in that case. Then, if Congress wanted to do it, we would have to face the constitutional issue. Senator HATCH. Your decision in that particular case has been
attacked as denying a father the right to visit his child. Judge BORK. I did not do that. Senator HATCH. AS a matter of fact, you remanded the case to
enable the father to continue his legal battle to enforce his State-
created visitation rights. You did not deny him access, but you kept
that door open. But again, it shows how they are distorting your
record with their inflammatory rhetoric and I think doing you a
great injustice. It is, I think, to show that these are the hardest cases. I am sure
that there are valid and very strong interests on both sides of these
types of cases, and it seems to me unfair, however, to attack you
for ruling against one interest without mentioning that an even
more compelling interest was on the other side of the case. That
seems to me to be one of the hallmarks of this political campaign
against you. Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I don't know that I ruled against an interest. I do think judges have a role to play sometimes in bringing issues to the attention of the legislature that the legislature
hasn't focused upon, and the preferred solution is a legislative solution. Then the court has to act if the solution isn't a good one. Senator HATCH. Thank you. Now, the Skinner case was brought up. In your 1971 Indiana
Law Journal article you commented on the Supreme Court's decision in Skinner v. Oklahoma in 1942. In that decision, the Court
struck down as unconstitutional, under the equal protection clause,
a law that provided for sterilization of convicted robbers but not of
embezzlers. Now, some have taken your comments in 1971 out of context. As
I understand it, your only point there in your article was that the
case was defective as a matter of legal protection analysis. Judge BORK. Senator, could you point me to the page where I said these things? Senator HATCH. Well, I'm just kind of summarizing what I
thought you stood for. Judge BORK. Okay. The CHAIRMAN. Don't worry. He'll take care of your interests,
Judge.
Judge BORK. Pardon me? The CHAIRMAN. I said don't worry, he'll take care of your interest. Judge BORK. I know. But I Senator HATCH. Judge, I think you're doing a pretty good job of
taking care of it yourself.
Judge BORK. I just thought I would enjoy it more if I had the page.
Senator HATCH. Judge, you don't need me to take care of your interests.
But the point is, you weren't suggesting, I take it, that there was
no basis at all for that decision in the entire Constitution, such as
the eighth amendment prohibiting cruel and unusual punishment;
is that correct? Judge BORK. That's correct. Senator HATCH. YOU were just questioning the source of constitutional authority, the way it was used at that particular time? Judge BORK. This entire article, Senator, is that kind of thing. At
one point, on page 11, I stop, after criticizing a string of cases, and
say that some of them maybe you could reach—I said some of them
are in political agreement, and perhaps Pierce could be reached on
acceptable grounds, but there is no justification for the Court's
methods. That's what I have been talking about. In fact, more than
Pierce could be reached on acceptable grounds; Meyer v. Nebraska,
which invalidated a statute that prohibited the teaching of children
in a foreign language, could also be reached on an acceptable
ground. But what I was focusing on here is the court's reasoning, because
a judge has no mandate to govern from any source other than his
logical demonstration that he got out of the legal materials. If a
judge doesn't demonstrate that, then we're entitled to be unconvinced by the result. Senator HATCH. That's coming across, I think, very well. I think
for those who have studied your record and those who really do it
fairly, they're going to conclude that you're testifying very truthfully here, and I think accurately and honestly and very intelligently. Let me just end with this. I was interested in Senator Kennedy's
comments about you and your writings and other lectures about
the rights of women. Before heightened scrutiny was employed in the equal protection
analysis, the reasonable basis test that you advocated was used to
strike down gender discrimination. In other words, the very test
that Senator Kennedy was criticizing, saying it was used to uphold
gender discrimination, was actually used to strike down gender discrimination. For example, in the Reed v. Reed case, which struck down a law
that preferred men over women in the appointment of administrators of the States, it's a perfect illustration where the reasonable
basis test that you believe in was used to benefit women. Moreover, in the Claiborne case, your reasonable basis test was
employed to strike down discrimination against the retarded. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HATCH. And you're aware of that.
In that case, Justice Stevens made the same point you have
made today; that is, that the equal protection clause of the Constitution of the United States of America applies to everyone, not just
selected people, not just one special class, or not just one person
over another. And I think your views harmonize with Justice Stevens, and I think they surely indicate that you're in the mainstream.
In every one of these cases—and I think the importance of your
testimony here today—it is not only that you're extremely intelligent, one of the great judicial minds of our country, but that you're in the mainstream. You have shown it through the opinions that
you've written, I think by the articles that you have written, that
have always had a strong and good legal underpinning to them.
You have shown it through indicating to the people of America
today who are watching this on television that these cases are complex, they're not simple, little bitty things, and there are usually
good arguments on both sides of the case, and generally compelling
arguments, and you have to, as a judge, honestly make the best de­cisions that you can with regard to each case.
In every case in your 5 years on the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, the most important appellate court in the
country except for the Supreme Court—and some actually believe
it may be more important because of the broad range of cases the
Supreme Court never sees that you do—that you have been in the
majority an awful lot and you haven't been reversed, and you have
had the Supreme Court adopt your actual language time after time.
Now, I think that stands you in good stead. I think it is time for the American people to realize that what is involved here is really
politics. Your opponents will try to show where you're an inadequate judge, or that you're unethical, or that you don't have ability, or your intellectual reasoning is not adequate or within the
mainstream, they can't show it by your opinions or by your writ­ings.
What they have done, the thing that I find really reprehensible, as I have looked at all these various groups out there who are criticizing you and have done it very selectively, they have been very
selective in the use of their evidence, they have been selective in
the use of their statistics, they have been improper in the use of
their rhetoric, they have been inflammatory—If you look at these
full-page ads, it makes you wonder how anybody could support
some of these organizations in coming up with that, I should say,
"clap trap" that really doesn't deserve to be injected into this type of an important nomination.
I just want to say to you, I have watched you for many, many years. You and I differ on the balanced budget amendment. We
differ on the Constitutional Conventions Procedures bill, and on
whether or not a convention can be limited to the single issue for
which it's set up for. We differ on the innercircuit tribunal and we
differ on diversity jurisdiction, and I am sure there are some other
issues as well. But the point I'm saying is, it isn't important that
we differ. What is important is the type of person you are, the reputation that you have, the intellect that is compelling, and the reasons why people like Chief Justice Burger have given you the accolades that they have, people who have sat there and people who know.
What really appalls me is how some of these law professors across this country have interjected some of these nuances into this
that really don't deserve to see the light of day. I am very disappointed. And what really has me outraged is the same American
Bar Association that found you unanimously exceptionally well
qualified back in 1981, just a week ago had four of the 15 say that
you're not qualified.
Judge BORK. I think it should be mentioned, Senator, that I think
Senator HATCH. Wait. Let me just finish. I'm going to conclude.
Now, ten of them have said you have the highest rating you could possibly have. That bothers me a lot. I'll tell you, I hope it bothers the American people.
I want to thank you, Judge. You have been very candid, I think you have been candid to all of us, and I appreciate the testimony. I, for one, admire your legal intellect.
Judge BORK. Thank you very much, Senator.
Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. Judge, there is much I also admire about you, particularly your physical constitution, to sit there all these hours.
We are going to end the hearing now, but I would like you to think about tomorrow on how you would like to go about this, in terms of the length of time. You're the one sitting there. At some time tomorrow you and I can speak, or your representatives, but I want to make it clear that I am prepared to go as long and expe­dite this as rapidly as you would like. But I also understand there are limitations to anyone's ability to physically sit there that long. So I will need some guidance from you as we go.
I would like very much to move on. Possibly we could finish with you as a witness tomorrow. I don't know that. We have seven more of my colleagues, which will take us into mid-afternoon. Then there will be a second round. But I would like you to be thinking about a time frame in which you would like to proceed tomorrow.
Judge BORK. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. That's very kind of you. I seriously doubt, with seven more Senators to take the time, plus the second round, that we can conceivably finish to­morrow.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, let's you and I, after lunch, talk, because again, I mean this sincerely, I would like very much to accommo­date what I know if I were in your spot would be a very difficult seat to be physically sitting in. I don't mean difficult in answering.
Judge BORK. What I meant by not finishing tomorrow was, if we can't finish tomorrow, by going to 8 or 9 o'clock, then I would prefer not to go to 8 or 9 o'clock and finish the following day.
The CHAIRMAN. Why don't we talk after lunch.
The hearing is adjourned until 10:00 o'clock tomorrow morning, when Senator Metzenbaum will begin the questioning.
The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order, please. Good morning, Judge BORK, and welcome back. Judge BORK. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. We left off the questioning yesterday; in the first
round with Senator Metzenbaum to start today, I would like to
briefly discuss today's schedule and then proceed with Senator
Metzenbaum's questions. Today is an important day on the Hill. The President is coming
up to speak on the Capitol steps. I would suggest, unless any of my
colleagues have a different view, that we recess at 12:30, or as close
thereto, as we finish up whomever has that round, finish up between 12:30 and 1 and recess until 2:30. I understand the President
may be here until 2 or thereabouts; I am not certain of that. If that is agreeable with my colleagues and with you, Judge,
somewhere after 12:30, before 1, we will stop, reconvene at 2:30,
and make a judgment at that time how late we will go today and
whether or not, Judge, it will be necessary for you to come back
tomorrow. Quite frankly, I think it probably will be. I do not think
we will finish today. You and I have discussed it; if we can finish
today without it going very late, we will try. If not, we will come
back tomorrow. Does the ranking member have any comment he wishes to
make?
Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do not have
any comment. I think we can just move along as fast as we can.
The CHAIRMAN. I yield to the Senator from Ohio, Senator Metzenbaum. Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Judge Bork.
Judge BORK. Good morning, Senator.
(193)
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, I want to ask you some ques­tions about your decision to fire Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox.
President Nixon first asked Attorney General Richardson to fire
Cox, but as we know, Richardson refused and resigned. Deputy Attorney General Ruckelshaus also resigned, but you agreed to stay
on and fire Mr. Cox. The regulation in effect when you fired Mr. Cox flatly prohibited
firing him unless he engaged in extraordinary improprieties, which
he clearly did not. That regulation had the force and effect of law.
Under these circumstances, your firing of Mr. Cox was a violation
of the law, was it not? Judge BORK. NO, I do not think it was, Senator. Senator METZENBAUM. The court said it was. The court in Nader
v. Bork stated, "The firing of Archibald Cox in the absence of a
finding of extraordinary impropriety was in clear violation of an
existing Justice Department regulation having the force of law and
was, therefore, illegal." So when you say it was not, you are saying that the court's decision meant nothing. Judge BORK. I did not say it meant nothing. I think it is wrong,
Senator, and I will be glad to explain why I think so. Senator METZENBAUM. YOU have argued that the regulation pro­hibiting the firing of Mr. Cox was a technicality, but the court
which reviewed the matter found that you "abolished the Office of
Watergate Prosecutor on October 23rd and reinstated it less than 3
weeks later under a virtually identical regulation. It is clear," said
the court, "that this turn-about was simply a ruse to permit the
discharge of Mr. Cox. Defendant's order revoking the original regulation was, therefore, arbitrary and unreasonable and must be held
without force or effect." The court further said, "The Attorney General chose to limit his
own authority by promulgating the Watergate Special Prosecutor
regulation. It is settled beyond dispute that under such circumstances, an agency regulation has the force and effect of law and is
binding upon the body that issues it. The Supreme Court," said the
court, "has twice held that an executive department may not discharge one of its own officers in a manner inconsistent with its
own regulation concerning such discharge." Now, you say that they were wrong? Judge BORK. May I discuss that case, Senator? Senator METZENBAUM. Please do. Judge BORK. In the first place, it should be noted that the only
reason the amendment to the regulation did not issue immediately
was it was a Saturday night, Monday was a holiday, Columbus
Day, and we could not get it published in the Federal Register.
But in the second place, it should be said—by the way, Mr. Cox
did not join in that lawsuit and did not seek back pay or to be reinstated. The cases relied upon in Judge Gesell's opinion are all cases
in which a department head issued a regulation and then himself
did something in contradiction to it. I thought, and still think, that
those cases do not apply to a case where a department head issues
a regulation and the President orders him—the President gives an
order to abolish that regulation, which is, in effect, what happened.
No case cited by the court in that decision involves anything like
that. I should also say that I appealed that case, and the moment I appealed it, the plaintiffs rushed in and said the case is moot; that is,
there is no longer a live controversy. I replied that the case was
moot, there was no live controversy when you filed it. However, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit agreed that the case was no longer a live controversy and sent it back to the district court with instructions to vacate the opinion and decision. Of course, as we know, the instructions to vacate mean that the case no longer exists, in effect; the opinion no longer exists, in effect. Judge Gesell did vacate his decision and opinion. Senator METZENBAUM. It was sent back to be vacated because there was a new counsel at that point; therefore, the office was no longer vacant. So the issue was moot. But the thing that concerns me, Judge Bork, and I think probably concerns millions of Ameri­cans, is that you are up for confirmation to be a member of the highest court of the land; a court determined that your action was illegal; you disagree with that position. But I wonder whether or not every American may not say, "Well, I can commit an illegal
act also and it is not so bad because a member of the Supreme
Court of the United States committed an illegal act and he disagreed with it, and I disagree with the act that convicted me," or
whatever, in connection with some particular matter in which an
individual is involved. It is the message. Can an individual say, "I disagree with a
court's decision," and that be the end of it? And I am aware of the
fact that you Judge BORK. That is not the end of it, Senator. I tried to appeal
it. Senator METZENBAUM. I understand. Judge BORK. And I did not get a chance to have that ruling
tested on appeal because there was no longer a live controversy. So
I never got to run through it, and I resisted dismissing that case in
the court of appeals. I wanted to get to the issues. I think that night all of us assumed that, as far as I know, Attorney General Richardson and Deputy Attorney General Ruckelshaus assumed that the regulation did not stand in the way of a
presidential order. Furthermore, I should note that Mr. Cox himself referred to the delay in putting out a new regulation changing
the charter, abolishing the charter, as a technical defect. At most,
it was a technical defect. I do not even think it was that. Senator METZENBAUM. YOU are telling us this morning that you could not change the regulation on Friday because you could not
get it into the Federal Register. Judge BORK. I could not publish it. Senator METZENBAUM. But the facts are that whether you had
done it on Friday or on Monday, the court still would have determined, apparently, that it was a ruse, and that it was just a way of
getting around the regulation because you reinstated the same regulation, exactly the same regulation, 3 weeks later. So there is no
reason to believe that the court would have come to any contrary
conclusion.
Judge BORK. Oh, I think there is, Senator. I do not think there
was any evidence before that court of a ruse. I did not discuss this
with the President at all. We did not contemplate a new special
prosecutor. We contemplated that the investigations would be run
effectively by Messrs. Henry Ruth and Philip Lacovara in their old
building with the same staff in the same way. There was no contemplation of a new special prosecutor until it became clear that the public wanted one.
Senator METZENBAUM. Was there ever any doubt in your mind that the people of this country expected the special prosecutor to
go forward and obtain the facts with respect to the matter of Wa­tergate? Was there ever any doubt in your mind that that
Judge BORK. NO, there was never any doubt in my mind that the people of the country wanted the investigations to go forward and
prosecutions to result, if justified, and there was never any doubt
in my mind that that is exactly what I wanted. In fact, I did my
utmost to keep that Special Prosecution Force intact and going for­ward.
Senator, we can get into the details later, but I think it is impor­tant—and I think this is really what the matter is about. This is
the final official report of the Watergate Special Prosecution Force,
not written by me, written by the men and women in the Special
Prosecution Force. They say on Page 11, "The Saturday Night Massacre did not halt the work of the Watergate Special Prosecution
Force, and the prosecutors resumed their grand jury sessions as
scheduled the following Tuesday. Bork placed Assistant Attorney
General Henry Peterson, head of the Criminal Division, in charge
of the investigations WSPF had been conducting." And here is a
crucial sentence. "Both men assured the staff that its work would
continue with the cooperation of the Justice Department and with­out interference from the White House."
That is exactly what happened.
Senator METZENBAUM. YOU consistently took the position, did you, that the tapes should be made available, that the President
should cooperate, and that the special prosecutor's responsibility should go on?
Judge BORK. I took the position that the special prosecutor's people, all of whom remained in place and in their own building,
should go on. I never took the position that the President had to hand over evidence if he thought he had a legal right not to. I took the position that the Special Prosecution Force had a right to go to court to compel him to hand over evidence, and, indeed, they did.
Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you some questions about that. On October 24, 1973, 4 days after you fired Archibald Cox,
you had a press conference on the Watergate matter. You said,
"Until late last Saturday afternoon, I was not involved in these
matters at all. I had upon two or three occasions, I suppose, discussed jurisdictional problems concerning the Special Prosecution
Force with Elliot Richardson and upon occasion, perhaps two occasions, with Archibald Cox and some of his staff. But I did not know
the details of what the jurisdictions were."
The White House has also stressed that you were not involved in
the Watergate matter prior to your firing Mr. Cox. The White
House submission on your nomination states, "Prior to Saturday evening, Bork had only been tangentially involved in giving advice to Elliot Richardson on the jurisdiction of the special prosecutor."
In fact, Judge Bork, a review of the record shows that you were involved in giving advice to the White House on the issue of execu­tive privilege. I want to ask you about some documents, which at this point, Mr. Chairman, I ask be included in the record. Under your rules, we will make them available during the next break.
Judge BORK. Well, I wonder, if I am going to be questioned about documents, Senator, whether I may not see the documents now.
Senator METZENBAUM. Surely.
The CHAIRMAN. I think that is appropriate. We will get you that. Senator Thurmond whispered something in my ear. Would you repeat what you said, Senator?
Senator METZENBAUM. I said that under your rules, as I under­stand it, if special material is to be made available, you have asked us not to do it during the hearing, but to wait for the recess. I cer­tainly intend to make them available to Judge BORK.
The CHAIRMAN. Correct, yes, just not to the press because I do not want to get into the business of passing out documents at this point. You can do that at the recess. But Judge Bork, as you have just given him, should have the documents in front of him from which he will be questioned.
Does he have the relevant documents now?
Senator METZENBAUM. He does, indeed.
Senator METZENBAUM. The first document is a memorandum from Alexander Haig to the President, dated August 2, 1973, with
two attachments. Then there is a letter from Robert Bork to General Haig, dated July 31, 1973, and a letter from Charles L. Black,
Jr., to the editor of the New York Times, dated July 25, 1973. The second document or group of documents is a memorandum
from Pat Buchanan to Al Haig, dated August 1973, with marginal
notations and an attached newspaper column.
The third document is a memorandum from Al Haig to the President, dated August 8, 1973, with two attachments.
Judge BORK. I seem to have about five copies of each of these,
Senator. If I can find the August 8th one—here we are. Senator METZENBAUM. All right? The CHAIRMAN. Take your time, Judge. Judge BORK. That is fine. Senator METZENBAUM. And a draft Congressional Record insert
by Congressman Eckart of Texas, dated August 1, 1973, as well as a
letter from Robert Bork to General Alexander M. Haig, Jr., dated
August 3, 1973, with marginal notations and an attached Congressional Record insert. The fourth is a letter from Robert Bork to Leonard Garment,
August 3, 1973, with an attached Congressional Record excerpt. The fifth is a log of the President of August 3, 1973.
First, Judge Bork, would you turn to Document A? Do you have
that there? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator METZENBAUM. The second page of that document is a
letter from you to General Haig. It states in part, "The enclosed
letter to the New York Times makes so persuasive an argument for
absolute presidential privilege that I thought you ought to see it. It
has helped change my prediction on the probable outcome of litigation on the subject." General Haig sent your letter to the President, as shown on the
first page of the document. He included this statement of his. "It is
also significant that Bob Bork has reversed his originally skeptical
attitude on our position." Now, Judge Bork, you were not simply passing on an interesting
article. You were advising Mr. Haig and the President regarding
your legal opinion of the President's right to turn over subpoenaed
written or taped records of consultations held by him as President.
Contrary to your statements that you were not involved, you were
actively advising the White House; isn't that correct? Judge BORK. Of course it is correct, Senator. The Department of
Justice is asserting executive privilege or government confidentiality, whatever we are going to call it, all of the time. And, in fact, at
one stage of this, Attorney General Elliot Richardson asked me to
try to work out with Mr. Philip Lacovara a common position on executive privilege so that the Watergate Special Prosecution Force,
which was trying to defeat executive privilege, and the Department
of Justice, which in all kinds of cases—not in the Watergate cases,
but in all kinds of cases—was asserting executive privilege. Mr. Lacovara and I tried to work out some means in which we would not
wind up opposing each other, not directly, but wind up asserting
opposing positions.
Executive privilege was a very touchy business, and I talked to
people about it frequently. Now, in this letter, I think I had said to
the White House—I do not know what I said. I guess I had said
that the strong stand on executive privilege, which they asserted in
all kinds of cases, was not going to work. My good friend, Charles
Black, who was a colleague of mine at Yale, sent me this letter and
said he was sending it to the New York Times. I think it appeared in the New York Times. And I passed it on.
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, apparently you had previous communications with the White House on this issue; is that right? Judge BORK. Of course, because we had the executive privilege
problem in all kinds of cases, and we were concerned about getting our positions worked out.
Senator METZENBAUM. That is the implication of General Haig's statement, that you had reversed your originally skeptical attitude on the White House position.
Judge BORK. I do not know if it was reversed. What I said was it helped change my prediction on the probable outcome of litigation. I do not even know what litigation that means.
Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you, Judge Bork, about Docu­ment B. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator METZENBAUM. That document is a memo sent from Pat
Buchanan to Al Haig, dated August 3, 1973, attaching a column by
Professor Charles Black. In that column, Professor Black argued
that, "Mr. Nixon is dead right in refusing compliance with subpoenas, whether issued by a committee of the Senate, by a grand jury,
or by any other authority, commanding the production of written or taped records of consultations held by him as President."
In other words, he argued that President Nixon could stonewall on the issue of turning over the tapes sought by the special prosecutor. Mr. Buchanan's comment in the column was, "Maybe this
guy could help us out." General Haig's note back to him said,
"Right. Solicitor General thinks highly of him and supports this analysis."
In other words, Mr. Haig was relying on your endorsement of Professor Black and your reversal of your position that the Presi­dent had no obligation to turn over the tapes.
Judge BORK. Well, I did not say that, Senator. I said that it helped change my prediction of the outcome of litigation. I should
say I have not read this letter by Professor Black in a long time,
but Professor Black is a highly respected constitutional scholar and was not a supporter of Mr. Nixon's.
Senator METZENBAUM. I am not questioning that. I do not think that is the issue. Judge BORK. But you did say that, in other words, he said the
President could stonewall. Professor Black would not have said a thing like that.
Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you about Document C. That document includes a letter dated August 3, 1973, from you to Gen­eral Haig, forwarding another analysis by Professor Charles Black, which was inserted in the Congressional Record by Congressman Eckart of Texas. You say in your letter, "I think you will find these additional ideas quite interesting."
As in the previous case, "these ideas" you were referring to had
to do with Professor Black's position that the President did not
have to respond to a subpoena by anyone; in effect, that he had unlimited executive privilege. General Haig then passed on your submission in a memo to the President dated August 8th. His memo
said, "Bob Bork has sent me a copy of another letter written by
Charles L. Black, Jr. I believe you will find it of interest." As I see it, again, contrary to your statement that you were not
involved, you were giving your advice to the White House. And as I
understand the role of a Solicitor General, the Solicitor General is
the attorney for the United States, not necessarily the private
counsel to the President of the United States. Is that correct? Judge BORK. NO, he is attorney for the United States, and sometimes the United States is represented by the President. Let me make one thing clear, Senator Metzenbaum. I never advised the White House how to meet, how to deal with the Watergate Special Prosecution Force. The most I did was send over
Charles Black's letter to the New York Times, which was public,
and there was no business about it. The only time I dealt with the
White House on executive privilege was when Mr. Richardson put
me in charge of trying to mediate a position between the White
House and Department of Justice and the Special Prosecution
Force. Since we represented the President in a lot of litigation
having nothing to do with Watergate, it was essential that we work
out, if we could, some particular position. I used to confer with Fred Buzhardt, the President's counsel, and
with Philip Lacovara. We never achieved an accommodation in
principle.
Senator METZENBAUM. Let me proceed. In November 1973, you
testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee regarding the functions of the new special prosecutor. After that hearing, Senator
Kennedy wrote you a letter dated November 16, 1973. He asked
you, "Prior to October 20, 1973, did you ever discuss with the President the subject of executive privilege, the tapes, or Mr. Cox's activities? Please provide details of any such conversations, date, subject, surrounding circumstances, who said what to whom." You responded, "I have never discussed with the President the
subjects of the tapes or Mr. Cox's activities either before or after
October 20, 1973. The President discussed the subject of executive
privilege with me on one occasion. Prof. Charles Black of Yale Law
School had written a letter to the New York Times upholding the
President's right to confidentiality. The President telephoned me to
ask that I tell Professor Black, whom he knew to be a colleague,
that the President agreed with his argument and admired the skill
with which he made it." This is still you answering. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator METZENBAUM. "That was the only occasion upon which
the President mentioned executive privilege to me."
Judge BORK. That is true. Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, Judge Bork, that answer may be technically true, but it leaves the impression that the President
happened to see Professor Black's letter and decided to call you
simply because you were an acquaintance of his. You completely
failed to mention
Judge BORK. May I see my response, please, Senator?
Senator METZENBAUM. YOU have it there.
Judge BORK. I do?
Senator METZENBAUM. Yes. While you are getting that, I will carry on because time is running out.
You completely failed to mention that you were the one forward­ing Charles Black's analysis to the White House, and that you were endorsing it. Was not your answer to Senator Kennedy only half the story? Or to put it another way, did you not fail to answer the question completely?
Judge BORK. I do not think so, Senator. It occurred to me that it was important that I forward a copy of a New York Times letter to General Haig, and that General Haig gave it to President Nixon, but I did not discuss executive privilege with the President. He called me once to say he liked Professor Black's letter. I think, if I have my dates correct—since the President did not call me fre­quently—that I took that—I think. Now, I want to be careful be­cause I am not sure of the dates.
I had been asked by General Haig right in that period of time to resign as Solicitor General and become President Nixon's chief de­fense counsel. After discussions, I convinced General Haig that I was not the man for the job. And I think I interpreted the call from the President more as a gesture to say he did not hold it against me, because there was nothing to the call and he would not ordinarily have called.
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, you have said that firing Mr. Cox could not hamper the investigations of the Office of the Special Prosecutor. At your 1982 confirmation hearings, you stated, "There was never any possibility that the discharge of the special prosecu­tor would in any way hamper the investigation or the prosecutions of the special prosecutor's office."
But you had no guarantee from President Nixon at the time he fired Mr. Cox that there would even be another special prosecutor. Is it not a fact that the decision to appoint a new special prosecutor was not made until several days later after the President had pro­voked a firestone of controversy around the country?
Judge BORK. That is right. Initially, we intended to leave the Special Prosecution Force intact but not to appoint a new special prosecutor, and they would go on under Mr. Ruth and Mr. Lacovara as before. But we did not initially contemplate a new special prosecutor until we saw that it was necessary because the Ameri­can people would not be mollified without one.
Senator METZENBAUM. AS a matter of fact, at your own press conference on the following Wednesday, October 24th, you were asked, "Would these mechanisms"—that is, to continue the investi­gation—"fall short of appointment of a special prosecutor as we know a special prosecutor?" You answered, "They may or may not. I have got a variety of alternatives in mind."
A report in the Washington Post of October
Judge BORK. Senator, I think there is more in there on that sub­ject, is there not? Somebody asked me if I had contemplated a new special prosecutor, and I said, "The thought has crossed my mind."
Senator METZENBAUM. That may very well be the case, and I will not challenge you if you say that you said it. I will not take issue
with you. The report in the Washington Post of October 24th stated, "Peterson"—who was then head of the Criminal Division at Justice—
"and Bork met yesterday afternoon with senior staff members of
Cox's prosecuting office to discuss how the investigation will proceed. 'The independence of the prosecution is still a problem,' one
of the senior Cox staff members who attended the meeting said last
night. Peterson said that no one has come to any firm conclusion
about the hiring of another independent prosecutor. The last few
days have brought that concept into question." The White House submission on your behalf contains this statement: After carrying out the President's instruction to discharge
Cox, Bork acted immediately to safeguard the Watergate investigation and its independence. He promptly established a new special
prosecutor's office, giving it authority to pursue the investigation
without interference. And according to a published report, you told
the American Bar Association in 1982, when you were being considered for an appointment to the Federal Court of Appeals, that
after Cox was fired you "immediately began searching for another
special prosecutor. "As a matter of fact, you actually ordered that the Justice Department itself take over the investigation, as I think you have just indicated, and the decision to appoint a new special prosecutor was
made by the President several days later only after widespread
public criticism. Is that not correct? Judge BORK. Senator, it is entirely correct, but let me tell you
how that happened.
On Wednesday afternoon, when I held the press conference and
said, in response to a specific question about whether a special
prosecutor was one of the mechanisms I had in mind to get evidence, I said, "It has, let us say, crossed my mind." That morning I
was not telling the press everything that we discussed. I think you
have documents in your possession that show that that morning
before the press conference I met at the White House with Leonard
Garment, Fred Buzhardt and Bryce Harlow. We recommended to
the President a new special prosecutor. So that was on track. I had
clearly been thinking about it before Wednesday morning, or I
would not have gone over there and made the recommendation. But there were two other aspects in which you used, Senator, the
word "immediately." I did promptly act to safeguard the Special
Prosecution Force. My great concern was that there might be a lot
of resignations over there which would hinder the investigations
and prosecutions.
I understood from the beginning that my moral and professional
life were on the line if something happened to those investigations
and prosecutions, and that is why I was adamant in asking them to
stay—and Henry Peterson was, too. Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, you have said a number of times that you went ahead and conducted yourself as you did because you were worried that there might be a number of resignations. The American Government, the American people were totally distraught at this moment. You have sort of suggested that be­cause some lawyers might quit—there are plenty of lawyers
around. I am a lawyer, plenty of lawyers around—that because
some lawyers might quit, even though they had had some experience in this area, that because of that you went forward and did
this act which the court determined to be an illegal act. Is that not
pretty hard for the American people to accept? Judge BORK. If I thought it was just a question of replacing one
lawyer with another, it would be pretty hard to accept. That is not
what was taking place, however. Senator, let me talk about that. I think maybe it is time now to
tell the story. Do we have time to tell the story? The CHAIRMAN. YOU can have all the time you want, Judge. Judge BORK. AS I said, my involvement with the Special Prosecution Force and Mr. Cox was limited to trying to draft, at the request of Mr. Richardson, a redefinition of the jurisdiction because
the feeling was that the jurisdiction was stated so broadly that it
covered things in no way related to Watergate. I did draft it; we
discussed it with Mr. Cox. We never came to an agreement, and all
this other stuff happened. I also dealt with the Special Prosecution Force through Mr. Lacovara at Mr. Richardson's request on the question of accommodating
our positions on executive privilege. I had no connection with the
negotiations with Mr. Cox about the order not to go to court and so
forth and so on. I wish I had because I could have said, if I had
been involved, what are you going to do if Mr. Cox refuses the
order—as, indeed, he should have. I had never disputed that. If they had asked themselves that question, they might have
asked: Who is going to discharge Mr. Cox? And if they had learned
that Mr. Richardson and Mr. Ruckelshaus were not going to do it,
they never would have gone forward with that order. They were
very sick that night because they assumed that they would not
have to get down to me. Now, I was sitting in my office Saturday afternoon writing a
letter, I think to a third grade class about the Bill of Rights, and I
went down at the time scheduled for Mr. Cox's press conference
into the office of Jack Hushin, who was our press officer then. We
watched it on television. The minute it was over, Mr. Richardson's
secretary came in the door and said, "The Attorney General wants
to see you." We went in then, into his office, and Mr. Ruckelshaus was there
and a few of Mr. Richardson's aides, and we talked about this crisis
that was developing. Finally, Mr. Richardson said something like,
"I think they are going to order me to fire him," or "They have
ordered me, or "I think they are going to order me." He said, "I
cannot fire Cox. Can you, Bill?" And that was the first time it occurred to me that I was third in command at the Department of
Justice. I suddenly saw it. The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me. Would you repeat that? You said,
"He said, 'I cannot fire him'"?
Judge BORK. "I cannot fire Cox," or words to that effect. The CHAIRMAN. And "Can you, Bill?" Judge BORK. TO Ruckelshaus. Ruckelshaus said no. The CHAIRMAN. If you do not mind, Senator. Did you or anyone
else ask why he could not fire him?
Judge BORK. We knew. He said he promised the Senate. The CHAIRMAN. But did he say it at the time? Judge BORK. I think so. You know, you can ask him. That was
my understanding. Mr. Richardson and I had discussed the tension
growing between the Special Prosecution Force and the White
House. The CHAIRMAN. Was there any discussion at that time with the three of you in the room, or are there just two of you now? Judge BORK. NO, three of us plus an aide or two of Mr. Richardson's who were going in and out. The CHAIRMAN. But there were three principals in the room. Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. YOU, the Attorney General and Ruckelshaus. Judge BORK. Right. The CHAIRMAN. And when it was at least implied or stated that
he could not be fired
Judge BORK. NO, he did not say he could not be fired. Mr. Rich­ardson always thought he could be fired. He said that he could not
do it personally.
The CHAIRMAN. He could not do it personally, and the reason being?
Judge BORK. His assurances to the Senate when he was con­firmed. The CHAIRMAN. Did Ruckelshaus think those assurances applied to the department or to an individual? Judge BORK. Well, the assurances to the Senate cannot very well
apply to the department unless you think the assurance was something like a statute, which the Senate, of course, could not pass by
itself. Now, Richardson regarded them as personal assurances, and I
will tell you why. I am skipping over now, but I would like to come
back to this. Later in the afternoon, Richardson went over to the White
House. They attempted to persuade him to go ahead. He attempted
to tell him he could not. While he was gone, Bill Ruckelshaus and I
discussed what might happen in the outcome. And I realized, because of a conversation we just skipped, I realized I would probably
be facing this thing. I never asked Ruckelshaus what I should do. I
did say to him at one point, "Don't you think my moral position is
different from yours?" He said yes. That is all I asked him. But let me go back to the conversation that maybe The CHAIRMAN. Why was your moral position different? Judge BORK. I had not made—as I understand, Mr. Ruckelshaus
felt that there was something in his confirmation hearings that
tended to bear on this; there was none in mine because I was confirmed long before. He also regarded himself as having come in as
Elliot Richardson's deputy, so that he felt himself bound in a sense
by Elliot Richardson's promises. I did not come in as Elliot Richardson's man, and I had made no assurances to the Senate.
But let me go on with this story. He said, "Can you do it, Bill?"
And Bill said no. That is the first time I realized I was going to be
asked the question. And he said, "Can you do it, Bob?" The thought
had never occurred to me before, and it hit me like a ton of bricks.
So I said, "Let me think." And they went on talking, and I got up and walked around Elliot's office several times. I finally said, "Yes,
I can do it, but I will resign immediately afterwards." And they
said, "Why would you resign?" And I replied, "Because I do not
want to be regarded as an apparatchik," an organization man who
does whatever the organization wants. They said, "If you do do it," both of them said, "don't resign. The
department needs the continuity and the stability." That is when
the thought about the necessity of holding the department together
first came into my mind, and Elliot and Bill were both quite strong
on the point that, if you do do it, do not leave because the department needs this continuity. And I was the one person who was a
department-wide officer who was left and who could make a good
attempt at both preserving the Department of Justice and preserving the Watergate Special Prosecution Force, which was obviously
the thing that had to be done in both cases. The CHAIRMAN. But that was not part of your reasoning, based on what you have just said, when you said, "I can do it." You just
said, "I can do it," and then only after that you were told by—and
you said, "I would resign." And they said, "Well, do not resign."
And the reason not to resign is to hold the department together,
and you said, "That is when it struck me." Judge BORK. My first thought to do it was the fact that we were
in enormous governmental crisis. I do not know if everybody remembers The CHAIRMAN. I was here. I remember it. Judge BORK. The sense of panic and emotion and
crisis that was in the air. It was clear then, I mean it was clear
from my conversations with Mr. Richardson and Mr. Ruckelshaus
that there was no doubt that Archibald Cox was going to be fired
by the White House in one form or another. The only question was
how much bloodshed there was in various institutions before that
happened. The CHAIRMAN. I am trying to figure out Bob Bork, the man,
here. I am not talking about the legality of this. Judge BORK. NO. I understand. The CHAIRMAN. Richardson says, "I cannot fire him. I made a
promise." Ruckelshaus says, "In my confirmation hearing"— Judge BORK. Well, he did not say "In my confirmation hearing."
This was all in the air. The CHAIRMAN. And they said, "Can you do it?" And you said, "I
do not know," and you got up and walked around—which I think
anyone would—and then came back and said, "Yes, I can do it." Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. And this is one of the most important moments
in your life, a crisis in your life. It would be for anybody. Can you
tell us what you were thinking when you got up and walked
around? What went through your mind? Judge BORK. Well, you know, it is a little hard to recall the
blurred thoughts and the emotion of the moment, but one thought
that went through my mind was that we were in a governmental
crisis which would not be resolved until Mr. Cox left. At no time
did I have any intention of anybody but Mr. Cox leaving, and I had
nothing against Mr. Cox. Mr. Cox had behaved perfectly properly.
Had I been in his position, I would have refused that order not to
go to court. He had to refuse it. But that was the crux of a crisis which had to be resolved sooner
or later. Now, the White House, when they got to me, began talking about the Six-Day War going on. Senator KENNEDY. Can I ask just one question? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator KENNEDY. When you were walking around the room, did
you ever think about the legally binding regulations that were in
effect and that were not suspended for 3 days? I was here at the
time that that charter was drafted, and I must say anyone that reviewed that history, any member, would understand that those regulations did not just apply to the individual who was Attorney
General; it applied to the Office of the Attorney General. Judge BORK. I understand that. Senator KENNEDY. If you understand that, I can see why you
were walking around the room. Judge BORK. NO, we were not, Senator
Senator KENNEDY. Specifically, were you troubled at all that
there were legally binding regulations that were in effect? Judge BORK. I think we all assumed Senator THURMOND. Mr. Chairman, let me make a statement. Senator KENNEDY. Could he answer that question? Senator THURMOND. Senator Kennedy has had his time. I suggest
we go on around and let him go on a second go-round. He is not
entitled to go now. The CHAIRMAN. Quite frankly, Judge, the reason why I pursued
this, I think maybe we could put an end to this. If you would
rather us go, we will go on.
Judge BORK. NO. Let me answer one question, and we can come
back to it later. The CHAIRMAN. Yes, all right. Judge BORK. Senator Kennedy's last question. The CHAIRMAN. We have interrupted you. Judge BORK. I wanted to answer the last question from Senator
Kennedy, if I may. The fact is none of us thought that that regulation was a bar to a
presidential order. I have seen Mr. Richardson quoted in the paper
recently saying that he never thought the regulation was a bar to
Mr. Cox's firing. None of us thought that. Nobody said, "But there
is the regulation." We assumed the President could do this over an
Attorney General's regulation. That is what we thought at the
time. That issue has never been determined. Right or wrong, that
is what we thought. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. I think we will go back.
Senator, you have two more minutes, and then we will go on.
Senator METZENBAUM. In your interview with the ABA in connection with your nomination in 1982, did you tell Mr. Coleman
that you guaranteed Mr. Cox's deputies they would have access to
the tapes?
Judge BORK. I do not know. All I told them, and I suppose what I
told Mr. Coleman, is that I guaranteed they would have a chance
to go for the tapes in court, or the evidence in court including the
tapes.
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, there seems to be some question as to what you did tell Mr. Coleman at the ABA investigation
in 1982. My staff has discussed with the ABA the question of obtaining information about your statements to the ABA regarding
your role in the Watergate matter. The ABA has said it is willing
to furnish that information if you will agree to waive any objection. Would you be willing to waive any objection to the ABA providing that?
Judge BORK. YOU mean the notes from Mr. Coleman? Senator METZENBAUM. The entire matter of your inquiry with
the ABA at that point concerning this matter. Judge BORK. Certainly. In fact, I thought I had. Somebody from
the Department of Justice or the White House asked me if I would
be willing to waive a week ago, and I said yes. Senator METZENBAUM. If some written document is needed, we
will just pass word to you to make it available. Judge BORK. Let me say this: As to what I said to Mr. Coleman—
I think those are his notes of the conversation—I do not know what
words I used. I have never tried to convey the impression that I
started searching for a special prosecutor instantaneously. Saturday night and Sunday I was not searching for a special prosecutor.
By Tuesday, I was thinking about it; whether I thought about it
Monday, I do not know. Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Judge, and I thank my
colleague from Wyoming for his indulgence of the extra 10 minutes. The Senator from Wyoming.
Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, you are very good, and I do
have to get over to a clean water markup in the Environment and
Public Works. I do appreciate your indulgence and your courtesy.
Thank you. Well, now, you have heard from our spirited and tenacious colleague from Ohio.
Judge BORK. We got halfway through the Saturday Night Massacre. We will have to get the other later, I suppose, Senator. Senator SIMPSON. He will be back. He will be back. Why not? We have only been talking about it for 14 years. Judge BORK. That is true. Senator SIMPSON. Fourteen years. This is a curious place. If you
go out in the land and say, "What were you doing on the night of
the Saturday Night Massacre," a guy will say, "What are you talking about?" But in this town when you say, "What were you doing
on the night of the Saturday Night Massacre," they say, "I was
just finishing shaving. I was going out to dinner. I will never forget
it my whole life. I went limp. My wife and I talked and huddled
together and had a drink and just shuddered in shock."  That really is not the way it is out in the world about the Saturday Night Massacre.
Judge BORK. I sometimes refer to it, Senator, as the events of October 20th instead of the Saturday Night Massacre.
Senator SIMPSON. Whatever it was, out in the real world they do
not refer to it as the events of anything, except that they know
that there was a crisis; they know that the President was wrong;
they knew it was wrong to fire Arch Cox—who was my professor in
labor law, so I got a little touch of that remarkable man. A great
guy. They knew all that was wrong and that there was a crisis, but
let me tell you, when it all came about and Jaworski tooled up,
they knew that there had been no gap. You can dance on the head
of the pin all day and all night and know that it got done. Judge BORK. That is what the Watergate Special Prosecution
Force says in their official report. Senator SIMPSON. Well, of course. Judge BORK. They did not miss a beat. Senator SIMPSON. Of course. Fourteen years' worth, and you have
talked about it now twice, I guess. Judge BORK. Oh, I talked about it innumerable times, Senator. Senator SIMPSON. I mean before this body: Judge BORK. I talked about it with the Senate Judiciary Committee in 1973. I talked about it before the House Judiciary Committee
in 1973. I talked about it before the Senate Judiciary Committee in
1982, and I am talking about it again today. And I have talked
about it before in numerable other groups. Senator SIMPSON. Well, in my mind, we are not going to find too
much more about that. You have given access to every record and
waived every possibility to withhold anything, and that is a very
appropriate stand. But I want to touch on one thing that the Senator from Ohio
said yesterday and again today about the use of the word "illegal".
It is very sinister as it is presented that the decision to file Archibald Cox was held to be illegal by a court, and should we then put
a man on the Supreme Court of the United States who has done
something illegal? And that is the sinister connotation of all of
that stuff, along with the reference to the case of Nader v. Bork,
and it was highly significant and it does not get said here—I want
to say it one more time because there is no such thing in politics as
repetition. You can tell somebody the same thing ten times and on
the tenth time they say, "Oh, I did not know you believed that." I have been all through that. This case of Nader v. Bork was vacated, period. You know, void, out the window, we all practiced
law, some of us. We know what vacating a decision is. It means it
is a zip, an absolute zip, in any kind of language you want to use,
whether it is Black's Law Dictionary or the babblings of Al Simpson, it is a zip; it means nothing. They vacated the decision upon the order of the court of appeals
and the case has no legal consequence whatsoever, period. Would
you agree with that? Judge BORK. Certainly. That is entirely what "vacated" means. Senator SIMPSON. With any other lawyer or with any other
judge. So I think if we are going to hear this continual referral to
Judge Gesell's opinion as authority for the proposition that the discharge was illegal, that that is just not so.
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, it should be said that, as Mr. Cox
said, that it was at most a technical defect because one could rescind that charter at any time and then the discharge would
follow. So, you know, it is a question of timing. But I think it was
not even a technical defect. I think a Presidential order overrides
an Attorney General's regulation.
Senator SIMPSON. I think it was highly unusual for them to do
that under the circumstances, and that was done. But I just want
to correct that distortion. There seems to be a continual distortion,
and I do not think it is appropriate. And again it came up in its
earliest form from some over-wrought executive director and in no
way should it continue to prevail here, in my mind. Now I wanted to ask a question—you are helping me, Orrin; you
are furnishing me all sorts of good things. What have you got here?
This is an impossible question. I ask you this: We now have heard from the Senator of Ohio, and
he is superb. He and I have been on the opposite side of more
issues, but he is a remarkable spirited man, and he has been a
great help to me in conference committees. If you want to go to a
conference committee, take Metzenbaum with you. He is good stuff. But he has asked you, and he has gone into the 1973 press conference, which I guess was the 23d or 24th Judge BORK. It was Wednesday, whatever that was. Senator SIMPSON. Pardon? Judge BORK. I think it was Wednesday, whatever that was. Senator SIMPSON. OK. And I noted that the Washington Post
went into that, but they both stopped at a certain point in the proceedings of the transcript of October 23d or October 24th. I have a
copy of the transcript before me, 1973. It is odd that they would
both stop. I mean if we are trying to develop a record, we ought to
get it all in. And that is what you have done. And meanwhile your opponents have spent—and not Senator
Metzenbaum, but your corporate opponents, your non-profit corporate opponents are so busy in this nonunanimous decision bit that
they have just nearly reached the point of exhaustion, and they are
out working now. I do not know where they are, but they are. But they seem to forget the text, the full text, and so you were
asked these questions as Acting Attorney General, with the special
prosecutor as one of the considerations in mind. It has, let us say,
crossed my mind.
Judge BORK. I just had recommended it that morning to the
President. Senator SIMPSON. And then everything stops. Let us go on with it. Let us take it all. Question: Will the Special
Prosecution staff stay together as an entity? Will the head be
under Mr. Peterson, and who will that head be? That is the question for Acting Attorney General Bork. Answer: "Well, right now, and so far as I am concerned, that
head is Mr. Ruth. They will stay together as an entity because I
think their effectiveness demands upon that." That is what you
said. There were other questions.
And then you said at the end, "I recognize, as does Mr. Peterson"—this is your quote—"that the American public must perceive
that the integrity of the Department of Justice and of the criminal
process is unimpaired, as well as our assuring you that that is true,
and we have under consideration a variety of procedures or mechanisms by which that perception may be encouraged or may be
made. The trust may be given to us."
The question then: "Mr. Bork, what are those?" Your response:
"I am not going to discuss the variety of procedures we have under
consideration." I would like to have, you know, like Paul Harvey
says, the rest of the story in there. I think that would be honest
and appropriate. And then, of course, the proof is in what happened, an operation that so irritated and overwhelmed the President that it must have been working pretty appropriately. I mean
that is what happened. Now enough of that. I just was thinking, what if the fondest
dreams of your opponents come true and that you are not confirmed by the Senate, what then can they expect? Well, I think obviously we will have an appointment by this President. There is
nobody that is going to question that, and then we will probably
have a nominee who we will probably confirm almost routinely,
such as a member of the Judiciary Committee, Orrin Hatch or
Paul Laxalt.
Judge BORK. They both sound good to me. Senator SIMPSON. Yes, not bad to any of us. I do not think any of
us on the panel would spend too great a time putting them right
there in the witness seat. But if that were not the case, that would
splendid. It might be Jerome P. Sturdley, a person who has quite
extensive experience on the bench and in the Bar, one that has
said very little or has written very little, that it was either
thoughtful, challenging or provocative or perhaps one whom the
special interest would have a great deal of difficulty finding out
one wit about for use in their opposition to the Presidential ap­pointment, and that is, you know, the reason we are here. But most likely he or she would obviously be one who would decline to do anything of what you are doing. They would not enter
in any way into the exceptional discussion, the give and take, the
review of judicial views and philosophy which we have seen these
past 2 days. You are doing it and will do it, which is really unprecedented even for your immediate predecessors, Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia and Bill Rehnquist. I think they ought to sober
up and realize they could get another nominee who would say
nothing and tell them nothing and share nothing. And I think that is worth, you know, considering because I think
the whole text of a new confirmation would be "Senator, I understand your position; I know what you would like me to say, but I
honestly feel, sir, that I must adhere to my view. It would be improper for me as a sitting justice or a nominee or a person dealing
with that issue in the future to advance an answer to that question. Next question please." Now that is what you are going to get in the next load in this
situation. I just think that after looking at some of the responses of
Judges Scalia and Sandra Day O'Connor, and they were perfectly
appropriate and no one challenged them a bit, nor could we in a
new nominee. And you are good enough to lay yourself right out on
the table. But, you know, the questions are there. They said "I cannot respond to that." That was interesting. They were very adroit and
very upfront and very acceptable, and we all accepted it, we on the
committee. And that is what is a little bit of reality too.
Then I think also of our friends in the fourth estate, as it gets
scratching down through the record of every person who has sat on
the federal bench at least in the last 10 years, I know of no one, no
one who has protected first amendment rights more than you. That
is an extraordinary statement, but it is true.
To you New York Times v. Sullivan is milk soup. You are ready
to go for the chunk. And New York Times y. Sullivan was an interesting case. It said that because we are politicians, people could say
things about us that were, quote, "false". People could say things
about us that were defamatory, those were the words, and that we
could do nothing unless we proved actual malice. Your language in the Oilman case was quite open, and I do not
have it here before me at this moment, but, in other words, you say
anybody—I guess it is kind of like anyone goofy to run for office is
dumb enough to get elected or something like that. But it was said
that we are indeed, and we should be, fair game. We better be able
to tell our story, bring our own brains with us when we come. That
is what the people expect of us. But you would take that much further, would you not?
Judge BORK. You mean further than New York Times v. Sulli­van?
Senator SIMPSON. Yes. Judge BORK. I think some—and I have not got a firm position on
how much further—but I think some doctrinal adjustment may be
appropriate because the nature of the libel suit has changed so that
it does now pose a greater threat to the press than it used to. But
what the nature of that doctrinal adjustment might be, I have not
worked it all out either. Senator SIMPSON. But you are saying that indeed it is something
that concerns the media that the libel suit itself, whether valid or
not, has a chilling effect on the fourth estate. Judge BORK. There are a number of publications that simply
cannot take a major libel suit. They do not have the resources to
defend it, never mind pay the judgment. Senator SIMPSON. I think that it is worthwhile to recognize what
an extraordinary ally and force you are. One of the quotes from
that case was you said, as you were sticking with the decision, the
fact that this was an expression of opinion. You said it is the kind
of hyperbole that must be accepted in the rough and tumble of political argument. And I agree with that. And that is one thing the Senator from Ohio and I have always
agreed on. It is a rough and tumble but you can do it with civility
and we try to do that. Let us get back to privacy. That is a recurring theme here about
privacy and judicial restraint and Griswold v. Connecticut, and we
have now talked about contraception, homosexuality, sterility or
else sexual preference, sexual gratification. There is no telling
where we will get if we keep struggling along in this area. Those
are important things. I do not even belittle that. But it has all been
taken out of context, every bit of it. I do not think you had an appropriate time to respond on the
issue of privacy, and especially with regard to the Griswold case
and the Skinner case. I guess I want to be sure because there was a
line of questioning which I gathered—and I think it was our Chairman, and it was a good line of questioning—it was, well if you do
not embrace these things through some method, how are we going
to get to that point? How do you protect?
I want to ask you if it is fair to say that you believe that privacy
is protected under the Constitution, but that you just do not believe
that there is a general and unspecified right that protects everything including homosexual conduct, incest, whatever—and you
mentioned that yesterday. Is that correct? Judge BORK. That is correct, Senator. I think the fact that I did
not get everything I wanted to say out was my fault because I was
trying to discuss with Senator Biden and others the constitutional
problem. But I think it requires a fuller answer than that and that
is this: No civilized person wants to live in a society without a lot
of privacy in it. And the framers, in fact, of the Constitution protected privacy in a variety of ways. The first amendment protects free exercise of religion. The free
speech provision of the first amendment has been held to protect
the privacy of membership lists and a person's associations in order
to make the free speech right effective. The fourth amendment protects the individual's home and office from unreasonable searches
and seizures, and usually requires a warrant. The fifth amendment
has a right against self-incrimination. There is much more. There is a lot of privacy in the Constitution.
Griswold, in which we were talking about a Connecticut statute
which was unenforced against any individual except the birth control clinic, Griswold involved a Connecticut statute which banned
the use of contraceptives. And Justice Douglas entered that opinion
with a rather eloquent statement of how awful it would be to have
the police pounding into the marital bedroom. And it would be
awful, and it would never happen because there is the fourth
amendment. Nobody ever tried to enforce that statute, but the police simply
could not get into the bedroom without a warrant, and what magistrate is going to give the police a warrant to go in to search for
signs of the use of contraceptives? I mean it is a wholly bizarre and
imaginary case. Now let me say this The CHAIRMAN. Would the Senator yield at that point just for
clarification? Senator SIMPSON. Yes, certainly, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. If they had evidence that a crime was being committed Judge BORK. HOW are they going to get evidence that a couple is
using contraceptives?
The CHAIRMAN. Wiretap. Judge BORK. Wiretapping? The CHAIRMAN. Wiretap. Judge BORK. YOU mean to say that a magistrate is going to authorize a wiretap to find out if a couple is using contraceptives?
The CHAIRMAN. They could, could they not, under the law? Judge BORK. Unbelievable, unbelievable. The CHAIRMAN. I understand that, but under the law, Judge,
could they not have—it was a crime, correct?
Judge BORK. It was a crime on the statute books which was
never prosecuted, never.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, the fact that it was not prosecuted did not
mean it was not a crime, does it?
Judge BORK. I have more to say about that, whether it was a crime or not. The CHAIRMAN. Let us assume they were drug dealers. There was evidence that they were involved in some other legal activity,
and there was a wiretap. Judge BORK. And they hear a discussion of contraceptives? The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Judge BORK. Nobody is going to get a warrant for that and no
prosecution is going to be upheld for that. And I would like to go
on to that point because The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. Senator SIMPSON. Judge, let me come back to another one here. Judge BORK. Well, okay. Senator SIMPSON. GO ahead. I want to hear that. Judge BORK. I want to say that you really could not enforce that
thing, and the privacy was not the issue in that case. It was the use
of contraceptives, and it is a little hard to locate something about
contraceptives in the Constitution. But be that as it may, let me illustrate my objection to what is
generalized right of privacy. Suppose a Senator introduced a bill
which said every man and woman and child in this country has a
right of privacy, period. I do not think that bill would go anywhere
until he had to tell everybody exactly what the right of privacy
protected. Did it protect incest? Did it protect beating your wife in
private? Did it protect price-fixing in private? No Congress would ever pass a bill like here, here is a generalized right of privacy; make of it what you will. No court would
uphold such a statute because it would be void for vagueness. Now the Supreme Court or Justice Douglas in effect did the
same thing with the Constitution. Nobody knows what that thing
means. But you have to define it; you have to define it. And the
court has not given it definition. That is my only point. Now the only reason that Connecticut statute stayed on the statute book—it was an old, old statute, dating back from the days
when Connecticut was entirely a Yankee State—the only reason it
stayed on the statute book was that it was not enforced. If anybody
had tried to enforce that against a married couple, he would have
been out of office instantly and the law would have been repealed. Furthermore, if the prosecutor brought such a case, I do not
think any court would uphold a conviction, assuming that you
could get a conviction. That law had not been enforced for so
long—it is an utterly antique statute; I do not think it was ever
enforced—I think you would have a great argument of no fair
warning, or sometimes that lawyers call—and I hate to use a word
like this—desuetude, meaning it is just so out of date it has gone
into limbo. So no prosecutor is going to bring that prosecution. If he did, the
law would disappear and furthermore no court would uphold the
prosecution. That is the fact. That law never went anywhere. My
objection—I think the law was an utterly silly law, but my objection is simply to the undefined nature of what the court did there.
And I have tried to illustrate that for you by asking you whether
you would vote for a statute that said nothing more than that ev­erybody has a right of privacy, and the court shall enforce it. I do
not think you would. Senator SIMPSON. Judge Bork, one thing that kind of surprised
me yesterday and yet it did not is that you really described that
case as being some kind of a law school exercise, a professorial
dream, a mess-around kind of a case. Is that right? Judge BORK. Yes, it was. Some professors found that law in the
books and tried to frame a case to challenge it on constitutional
grounds. And, as I say, they had trouble getting anybody arrested,
and the only person who could get arrested was a doctor who advertised that he was giving birth control information, contraceptive
information, and I do not know if they prosecuted him or fined him
under the aiding and abetting clause of the Code, and I think both
sides regarded it as an interesting test case. The whole case was
practically an academic exercise. Senator SIMPSON. Judge Black and Judge Stewart both dissented. Judge BORK. They did indeed, and Justice Harlan refused to go
along with the right of privacy. He had reasons of his own. He
used, I think, the concept of ordered liberty. Senator SIMPSON. It has been obviously suggested—Mr. Chairman, I have what, about 8 or 9 minutes or something like that? The CHAIRMAN. At least that much. Senator SIMPSON. Obviously expressed again and again that you
simply are a captive of the majority, that you do not listen to any
cry of the minority, whether in race or position or ideas, that you
have run roughshod over specific constitutional rights guaranteed
by the minority. And yet you said yesterday you are a true believer
in the Bill of Rights. I cannot believe the question was really
asked, but it was. And you were asked about your position on the
Bill of Rights. You said it guaranteed freedom of speech. I recall
that. Your decision in the Lebron case, which I read, the posters about
the jellybean empire or whatever it was, and you said that was a
perfectly appropriate expression. I think that gentleman is back
hanging his posters today, and they are new and even richer today,
and nothing wrong with that. I see they did give him until October
15 to display and then they are going to pull them down. You protected him on that, did you not? Judge BORK. I did indeed. Senator SIMPSON. Why? Judge BORK. Because the poster he was putting up was political
commentary. Only political commentary, only misleading political
commentary was banned. I mean there was no occasion to get in
any category of speech other than political speech in this case. It was political commentary, and on alternative grounds, one of
them was, I did not think an agency of government should have a
right to exercise a prior restraint on speech and I so held. Senator SIMPSON. YOU were holding in under those same circumstances very likely.
Judge BORK. Of course.
Senator SIMPSON. We talked about religion and the Judge has
left, but I thought Judge Heflin's remarks about religion were
superb yesterday and what he said about your religious beliefs and
it was crisply clear, like he is, about what that line of questioning
and what that gains, which is nothing. Judge BORK. I do not know. Is Judge Heflin, Senator Heflin going
to question me about that? Senator SIMPSON. I do not think so. He cautioned us all not to
spend much time asking about that. Judge BORK. Well, let me say one thing—I do not want to go into
my religious beliefs—but the report in a national magazine that I
was an agnostic arose from the following conversation, and the reporter agrees that it arose from the following conversation. He said
"You are not terribly religious, are you?" And I said, "Not in the
sense that you mean." That is it. He went, bang, he is an agnostic,
and I later denied that I was an agnostic in the New York Times
when I got a chance to. I took him to be talking about great piety and regular church attendance, and that is what I meant in not in the sense that you
mean. But agnostic does not come out of that conversation in any
way, and I am not an agnostic. But that is as much as I think I
should say about it. It is only the fact that it is on public record
that leads me to deny it, I mean it is in a publication. Senator SIMPSON. Well, that word was never used? Judge BORK. NO. Senator SIMPSON. All of us here on that Panel know how that
goes. Let me ask you this: If the government were to prohibit me from
exercising my right of privacy to educate my children in a religious
tenet—and there are people in the United States who feel very
strongly about that, every more strongly than I in fact—it is conceivable that a Judge could invalidate such a prohibition through
an interpretation of the Constitution, is that not correct? Judge BORK. That is correct. You mean if the government tried
to say that you could not educate your children in your religion? Senator SIMPSON. That is correct. Judge BORK. There is not a ghost of a chance that it would stand
up under the first amendment.
Senator SIMPSON. That is an important protection in your mind
under the Constitution. Judge BORK. It is a crucial protection. Senator SIMPSON. And, as I say, there seems to be a bit of a gathering force out in the country or at least there was several years
ago in various States. I remember a single case, I believe it was in
the State of Nebraska. So do I gather from what you have said in answers and responses
yesterday that you believe that privacy is indeed protected by the
Constitution in the fourth amendment, in the free exercise of religion clause and the like?
Judge BORK. Oh, yes. There are several crucial protections of privacy in the Bill of Rights. The framers were very concerned about
privacy because they had been subjected to a very intrusive British
Government, and they were very concerned that privacy be protected against the new national government, privacy in the aspects
that they wrote into the Constitution.
Senator SIMPSON. And just finally on the issue of Skinner v.
Oklahoma, which was a rather extraordinary case on the steriliza­tion of criminals. The equal protection clause, does it not protect
guarantees of protection from invidious discrimination? Judge BORK. Senator, it does, but I think that the most that I
said in criticism in this article about Skinner v. Oklahoma was that
the classification distinction made by the court could not be
squared with the other classification distinctions the court had
made. If I can find the articles—I usually cannot when it is crucial.
I really would not buy the way the Supreme Court there went
about it, but I think it is clear—people who have looked at it more
than I have say it is clear that that statute had racial animus in it,
and it struck at, in effect, crimes that at that time were more
likely to be committed by poor blacks than by middle-class white-
collar whites. And on that ground the statute would be unconstitutional. Senator SIMPSON. Without question. Judge BORK. Without question. But I should say this, you know,
the Supreme Court has never said that sterilization under some
circumstances is unconstitutional. I am not saying that that is a
good thing they have never said it. I just want to point out that
they have never said that. In fact, they have upheld sterilization
programs. Justice Holmes did in a famous opinion. Senator SIMPSON. What was that opinion. Judge BORK. That was Buck v. Bell, and I think it was a terrible
opinion. That was a case in which they provided Senator SIMPSON. Who wrote the majority opinion? Judge BORK. Holmes, Oliver Wendell Holmes. They provided for
sterilization of folks who were mentally retarded, I think after one
or two generations, and Holmes dismissed the equal protection argument as the usual last resort of the constitutional argument and
wrote the infamous line—I like Holmes but this is not one of his
better days—"three generations of imbeciles are enough." Senator SIMPSON. Justice Holmes said that? Judge BORK. Justice Holmes said that. Senator SIMPSON. I think we ought to get him back here. Judge BORK. Yes.  I think considering the alternative, he might be glad to come
back and do this. Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and I do want to
add, however, I would like entered in the record—and I will conclude my round, and you have been courteous—but it seems to me
so far that the extremism so far in this case and the extremist
views and the philosophy of Judge Bork, that the extremism is in
the rhetoric of the opponents of Judge Bork. That is where it is to
this point, and the stridency of that. I am not talking about the panel. I am talking about newspaper
ads and all this stuff, and television ads, and we have and will
have an opportunity to pursue this to find that we have a, quote,
"conservative judge" who exercises judicial restraint, who tries to
leave social policy decisions to the people and their elected representatives where the Constitution does not clearly speak, you are
that sort of judge.
And I want to enter into the record, Mr. Chairman, a thoughtful
piece in this morning's Washington Post of Lloyd Cutler, counsel
emeritus, as I call him, to Presidents, with a case-by-case illustra­tion that Judge Bork's criticisms of the Supreme Court decisions which we have been discussing for the past two days were in the main shared by the, quote, "moderate members of our contempo­rary Supreme Court".
And I can tell you, do not think what Lloyd Cutler has done has not been provocative for him, because it is so good and so pungent and so authentic, what he has been saying, that they have now tried to drum him out of the corps. And that is why he has always been a superb man and will always be.
So I would like that statement, "Judge Bork is called Judge Bork, well within the mainstream", unquote, be part of the hearing record. And I thank you very much.
The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
The CHAIRMAN. Senator DeConcini. Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Judge Bork, just to go back not at great length on the privacy
issue because I have a number of questions that I want to ask. But you raised something there on the enforceability or non-enforce­ability of the statute in Connecticut vis-a-vis the Griswold decision.
In the Bowers v. Hardwick, Georgia case, dealing with sodomy, that is an old statute that was on the books. I do not know. I be­lieve that it was 60 years or more that it had ever been in force, but in fact somebody enforced that statute, did they not?
Judge BORK. I do not think so, Senator. The policeman was in the house because of a traffic violation, as I recall. Is that correct? Senator DECONCINI. He was in the house. That is correct. He was
in the house Judge BORK. He observed—pardon me. Senator DECONCINI. He was in the house legally. Judge BORK. Yes. He observed homosexual conduct and I guess
made an arrest, but that ended it. There was no prosecution. The case arose because homosexuals sued to have the Senator DECONCINI. Yes. But is not making an arrest enforcing a
statute? Judge BORK. That is true. That is true. He made an arrest. Senator DECONCINI. What bothered me is this generalization
that, well, because it would never be enforced or had been is that it makes no sense. To me that is making a judgment for the legisla­tive body to make. If they want to pass a bill and if the prosecutor or the justice does not want to enforce it, should a judge say— should they weigh that, the fact that it has never been enforced?
Judge BORK. I think they have to in terms of fair warning. There are all kinds of statutes. You know, I am told in some States until recently there are still statutes that you could not drive a car with­out somebody walking in front of you swinging a lantern. If some­body suddenly popped out onto the freeway and enforced that, nobody is going to uphold that law.
Senator DECONCINI. But we are talking here about a little bit dif­ferent use or I believe a constitutional right of privacy. Let me just pursue with you.
You said yesterday, relating to a question that Senator Hatch asked you regarding Roe v. Wade and the ninth amendment, its ap­plication—and correct me please—you said something that nobody really knows what that amendment means. Is that correct?
Judge BORK. I do not know. I know of only one historical piece. There may be more. You know, this is not a subject I have re­searched at great length, but most people say they do not know what it means.
Senator DECONCINI. DO you know what it means? Judge BORK. It could be—you know, I can speculate. Senator DECONCINI. DO you have an opinion on the ninth amendment?
Judge BORK. The most sensible conclusion I heard was the one offered in the Virginia Law Review, which was that the enumera­tion, as the ninth amendment says
Senator DECONCINI. Enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
Judge BORK. That is right, Senator. And I think the ninth amendment therefore may be a direct counterpart to the 10th amendment. The 10th amendment says, in effect, that if the powers are not delegated to the United States, it is reserved to the States or to the people.
And I think the ninth amendment says that, like powers, the enumeration of rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage rights retained by the people in their State Constitutions. That is the best I can do with it.
Senator DECONCINI. Yes. You feel that it only applies to their State constitutional rights.
Judge BORK. Senator, if anybody shows me historical evidence about what they meant, I would be delighted to do it. I just do not know.
Senator DECONCINI. I do not have any historical evidence. What I want to ask you is purely hypothetical, Judge. Do you think it is unconstitutional, in your judgment, for the Supreme Court to con­sider a right that is not enumerated in the Constitution
Judge BORK. Well, no.
Senator DECONCINI. to be found under article IX?
Judge BORK. There are two parts to that. First, there are some rights that are not enumerated but are found because of the struc­ture of the Constitution and government. That is fine with me. I mean that is a legitimate mode of constitutional analysis.
I do not think you can use the ninth amendment unless you know something of what it means. For example, if you had an amendment that says "Congress shall make no" and then there is an ink blot and you cannot read the rest of it and that is the only copy you have, I do not think the court can make up what might be under the ink blot if you cannot read it.
Senator DECONCINI. Let me ask you this question: If you had to speculate, what do you think Madison or some of the framers had in mind as to unenumerated rights?
Judge BORK. They might have had in mind—this is pure specula­tion, which I do not think is
Senator DECONCINI. I understand. I said this is all hypothetical.
Judge BORK. All right. They might have had in mind what I just said about the enumeration of these does not entitle judges to over­ride the state constitutional rights. They also might have had in mind perhaps a fixed category of what they regarded as natural rights, although if they did have in mind a category of natural rights, I am a little surprised they did not spell it out and put it into the Constitution, because they specified all the other rights.
There is no evidence that I know of that this was to be a dynam­ic category of rights, that is that under the ninth amendment the court was free to make up more Bill of Rights. There is no evidence of that at all that I know of. And I think that had that been their objective, they could have spelled it out a lot better, and a lot of the constitutional debates we had right after the Constitution was formed, and John Marshall began applying the Constitution and so forth, would have been irrelevant debates because the court is just
entitled to make up constitutional rights. Senator DECONCINI. Would you say that in your judgment it would be unconstitutional for the Supreme Court to find a right—
we will not say what it is, but Right A Judge BORK. If a Supreme Court makes Senator DECONCINI. Because it is not enumerated
here. Judge BORK. If the Supreme Court makes up a new right for which there is not historical evidence, then I think it has exceeded
its powers under the Constitution. Senator DECONCINI. That is vis-a-vis your criticism of the Gris­wold case. Judge BORK. Yes, insofar as they did not explain adequately
where it came from and what it was. Senator DECONCINI. And if we follow that line of thinking, how would you address the Griswold case or the statute? You indicated
that you thought that it was a bad statute and the results of that
case you agreed with, I think you said yesterday, but not Judge BORK. I agreed with it politically. Senator DECONCINI. The structure of the decision.
How would you as a Supreme Court judge address a similar case
dealing with an area that you now feel is not enumerated or a constitutionally right set out? Where would you find that right if you
decided that you felt you wanted to come to that same conclusion
as you indicated on the Griswold decision? You wanted that conclusion Judge BORK. NO. I wanted that conclusion as a political matter.
You know, I make a sharp distinction between a judicial function
and a legislative function. If I were a legislator, I would vote
against that statute instantly. Senator DECONCINI. Right. Judge BORK. AS a judge, I would have to be persuaded that there
was something in the Constitution. Senator DECONCINI. DO you see anything else in the Constitu­tion? Judge BORK. I have not gone through this exercise, Senator, so I am just speculating. I suppose the most likely form of attack might
be the equal protection attack. I do not know. The CHAIRMAN. Equal protection you say, Judge? Senator DECONCINI. The equal protection clause. Senator LEAHY. I just did not hear the answer. Senator DECONCINI. Judge, going to the equal protection clause,
last week President Reagan said that your critics had been engaging in highly charged rhetoric that is "irrational and totally unjustified" were his words, end of quote. Many of your other supporters have said that they cannot understand what your critics
could possibly be concerned about. And to your credit—and I compliment you for this—I have not read of you saying that you do not
understand why people are concerned about you. You do understand apparently.
Judge BORK. I have not commented upon parties to this dispute at all. Okay?
Senator DECONCINI. Well, at least I did not read anything. So I
am correct. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator DECONCINI. NOW let me pose this hypothetical to you. If
you were a black man, do you not believe that you would be gravely concerned to read comments that you, Judge Bork, have made
about public accommodation laws, which you said, quote, "unsurpassed ugliness", that laws to ban literacy tests Judge BORK. DO you have, Senator, the page that is on and that
article? Senator DECONCINI. That is in the New Republic, 1963. I do not
have the page. I am sorry. I will have to ask someone to look it up
for you. That laws to ban literacy tests which were used in the
South to deny blacks their voting rights were, quote, "very bad". Judge BORK. Where is this. Senator? Senator DECONCINI. That is in hearings on the Human Life Bill,
the Judiciary Committee, 99th Congress in 1982. Judge BORK. Can we take these up Senator DECONCINI. Let me just finish these and then you can
address them one by one, if I may. The laws to ban literacy tests which were used in the South to
 
deny blacks their voting rights were, quote, "very bad, indeed pernicious constitutional laws", end of quote; that decisions to outlaw
poll taxes were, quote, "wrongly decided", unquote; that you disagreed with the decision revoking restrictive covenants, and that
you criticized the Supreme Court decision invalidating a California
referendum overturning open housing laws. Now you may well have legitimate reasons, and I am going to
give you ample time because I know the Chairman will insist on
for you to answer this. You might be able to persuade many people
that you were right when you made them, but do you not think
you have to agree that those kind of statements are ample in
nature to raise a great deal of concern about, quote, "where you
are coming from on these kinds of issues"? Judge BORK. If those statements were all that people had before
them, they should certainly raise a great deal of concern. I would
like to deal with each of them. Senator DECONCINI. Please do. Judge BORK. But before that, I should say, that if I were a black
man who heard those statements but knew my record as Solicitor
General and as a judge, I do not think I would be concerned because it is a good civil rights' record. Now let us go back. What is the first—you mean the New Republic article, Senator. Senator DECONCINI. Yes, sir, regarding the public accommodation.
Judge BORK. What I said was I was discussing the principle. It
starts off by saying "of the ugliness of racial discrimination there
need be no argument". Then I went on to talk about this bill which
forced association which worried me at the time, it does not worry
me now, not at all; it was a good idea. I said the principle of such
legislation is that if I find your behavior ugly by my standards,
moral or aesthetic, and if you prove stubborn about adopting my
view of the situation, I am justified in having the State coerce you into more righteous paths. That is what I said was the principle of
unsurpassed ugliness. It was the principle I thought was underlying this thing, which was a principle that can apply much more
broadly.
Senator DECONCINI. That is still your view? Judge BORK. No, it is not my view. This was based upon, as I
said, a time when I was libertarian and I thought the presumption
was always against State regulation of individual conduct. Senator DECONCINI. That is no longer your view? Judge BORK. NO, no. And I was insisting upon a principle of coercion that could be stated and would not have this broad sweep.
I no longer think that legislation can be rested always upon a
principle. It is more of a judgment of the individual situation that
you cure. Senator DECONCINI. Judge Bork, when did you cease being a libertarian? Judge BORK. About 1970. I was—you will see traces of it in an
article I wrote. At the time, I was trying to get my libertarian principles into the Constitution, much in the way that people get privacy into the Constitution. And I wrote an article that appears in
Fortune Magazine for December of 1968, I believe, called the "Supreme Court Needs a New Philosophy". You may think that is a
theme I harp upon, but Senator DECONCINI. Did that come upon you over a period of
time? Judge BORK. NO, no. I am just telling you this was the last time I
expressed this libertarian standpoint. Senator DECONCINI. And after that you changed. Judge BORK. Yes. Let me tell you about that, Senator, if I may. I
was in London that year and Fortune called me—I had written for
them before—and asked me to write something about the Supreme
Court. And I wrote about two models of how the Supreme Court
might go about its work. And one model was to take the lead of
Griswold, only instead of calling it privacy, call it freedom, which
it is, and construct the philosophy that lines up a more general
principle of freedom that the individual amendments are simply illustrations of. That sounded like a great idea to me then, and when I came
back from London after a sabbatical year, that is when I talked, of
course, with Alex Bickel and found the course going flat, and I
said, "What is wrong with this course? Why are not the students
excited?" And he said, "You are not saying those crazy things anymore", by which he meant those crazy libertarian things I used to
say. And that is when I first realized I was moving away. And by 1971 I had abandoned this attempt and said you have got
to go to the intents of the people who made the Constitution.
Senator DECONCINI. What about the reference here to the Voting
Rights Act as very bad? Judge BORK. Where is this? Senator DECONCINI. That is out of the hearings on Judge BORK. I have not got that before me. Was I discussing
Katzenbach v. Morgan?
Senator DECONCINI. Excuse me. The ban of literacy test, excuse
me, and it is the Katzenbach Judge BORK. Senator, I have always said, and it is quite obvious,
that a literacy test used to deny any racial group or ethnic group
or any other group access to the polls is bad under the Constitution, under the 14th amendment. I was not saying that the banning
of literacy tests was bad by the courts. Senator DECONCINI. That is how I read it.
 Judge BORK. Well, Senator
Senator DECONCINI. And that is fair enough. I think it is very
important that you clarify it. Judge BORK. Let me say this: I said here in this testimony that I
agree entirely with the dissent of Justice Harlan joined by Justice
Stewart in Katzenbach v. Morgan. And the reason I agreed with
the dissent was that the majority said that Congress by statute
could change a rule the Supreme Court had laid down. The Supreme Court had held that non-discriminatory literacy tests were
constitutional. Congress passed a statute which in certain circumstances says they are outlawed. And the Court said the Congress
can define the equal protection clause in some ways. I thought that was bad constitutional law. I do not think Congress can change the Constitution, which is precisely why I testified against the Human Rights Bill, which would have changed Roe
v. Wade by statute. And I certainly have never endorsed Senator DECONCINI. IS that the same reasoning, Judge Bork, that
you opposed the Civil Rights Act? Judge BORK. NO, no. Senator DECONCINI. What was the reasoning for that? Judge BORK. The 1963 article in the New Republic is not a constitutional article. That was simply political philosophy, and it was
very bad political philosophy and, you know, it is 25 years ago. And
I trust Senator DECONCINI. And I appreciate that. I do not want to be
held for everything that I did 25 years ago either, and I appreciate
that. Judge BORK. All right. But my views on Katzenbach v. Morgan
have not changed. I do not think that the Congress of the United
States can change the Constitution by statute. Senator DECONCINI. I have a little problem with that, Judge
Bork. Let us go on to something else regarding the 14th amendment.
Your view of the 14th amendment, can you give that to me so I
will not paraphrase it incorrectly regarding where you feel it applies as to racial discrimination or anything else? Just tell me, if
you will Judge BORK. The equal protection clause applies to all racial discrimination, and I think about the only instance in which I have
seen a court uphold a difference between races was when there was
a race riot in a prison, and the warden separated the races, and
somebody filed a lawsuit to challenge that. And the court said that
is reasonable. If there is a race riot, you can separate the races.
That is the only instance I can recall. Otherwise, it is just about
absolutely unconstitutional to make a racial distinction. Senator DECONCINI. TO make a racial distinction. Now your position also is that Congress nor the States can pass
laws defining that. Is that right?
Judge BORK. Well, you mean, defining what the substance of protections of the Constitution means? Senator DECONCINI. Yes. Judge BORK. I do not think so, Senator. If they can do that, Marbury v. Madison and the power of judicial review is dead. Senator DECONCINI. I cannot understand then why the precise words used in the 14th amendment, which are "deny to any person
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws" creates the
confusion that it does with you. It does not with me. What words of those words I just read are not precise? If the
plain language of the amendment requires States to equally protect
all within its jurisdiction, why would there ever need to be any
analysis of the legislative history or intent of the Congress when
those words are as precise as this person can read them? And I am not a student of the Constitution or pretend to be a
law professional of constitutional law. The amendment does not say
that the State cannot enact laws that discriminate. It says it must
equally protect any person. Does this not mean that a State must
enact laws to protect equally all persons? Is that not the rest of
that amendment? Judge BORK. I think what it means, Senator, is the State either
by statute or by executive action, any way the State can act, may
not deprive people of equal protection of the law. It does not mean
that the State must go out affirmatively and legislate Senator DECONCINI. But does it not mean it can go out affirmatively?
Judge BORK. Sure. A State can affirmatively protect racial
groups and other groups. There is no problem with that. Senator DECONCINI. But your position is then that to deny any person within its jurisdiction equal protection of the law does not
apply to other minorities. Judge BORK. NO, no. I did not say that. We went around this somewhat yesterday, Senator, and I prefer the position that Justice
Stevens enunciated. Senator DECONCINI. I do not want Justice Stevens' position. I
want your position. Judge BORK. Well, that is my position. Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Judge BORK. I was just telling you it is in the Cleburne case. The
historical meaning, the core idea, the trouble that caused the 14th
amendment to be adopted was the fear of and the reality of racial
discrimination against former slaves in this country, so ;tnat every
time a court reasons about the 14th amendment, it usually starts
with the paradigm case of racial discrimination. I objected to when the Supreme Court was using a method of
saying this group, illegitimate children, aliens is in; this group,
somebody else, is out. That seemed to me to be a very funny way to
proceed. It is much better to proceed—because we have no evidence
that any of those groups were meant to be in or out. It is much
better to proceed under the reasonableness test, which the thing
af sr all says, "nor shall any State deny to any person the equal
protection of the laws". Any person is covered. That means everybody is covered, men, women, everybody.
And the question, when a statute makes a distinction is whether
the State has an adequate interest in it and the distinction is reasonable. Now in a racial case it will almost never be reasonable. Senator DECONCINI. In a racial case. What about the sex discrim­ination cases? Judge BORK. Well, sometimes it will be reasonable and sometimes it will not because I do not Senator DECONCINI. Where do you find in this amendment that the reasonable standard is there, that it requires one standard here
for racial and then another standard as you apply it other than
racial? Judge BORK. Reasonable standard came in, I think, in the last century under the Supreme Court, and I think, if I may say so,
that is a reasonable way to read this clause because it applies to all
persons. We know that it is irrational to make a distinction between persons on racial grounds, utterly irrational. We also know that for
some purposes it is rational, reasonable to make a distinction between the genders, between the sexes. Senator DECONCINI. Let me tell you Judge BORK. But not always. Senator DECONCINI. I will tell you why I am so confused on it. In
a recent interview you were quoted saying that "The role that men
and women should play in society is a highly complex business, and
it changes as our culture changes. What I am saying (10 years ago)
was that it was shift in constitutional methods of government to
have judges deciding all of those enormously sensitive, highly political, highly cultural issues", end of quote. That was June 1, 1966,
the Judicial Notice. Now what troubles me, Judge, is why are the questions concerning sex discrimination any more difficult or any more complex and
undeserving of constitutional, judicial resolution than other questions routinely subject to the court constitutional analysis, questions such as the discrimination on the basis of race that we have
discussed here? It leaves me with a big void here that—and I know
that you have tried to explain it and I have paid attention yesterday, but I did not get it. Judge BORK. YOU are comparing, I take it, Senator DeConcini,
my
Senator DECONCINI. Yes, that is 1986. I am sorry. Judge BORK. My remarks about the Equal Rights
Amendment with my views of the equal protection clause. Is that
what you are saying? Senator DECONCINI. Yes. It is in that interview, yes, sir. Judge BORK. Yes. All right. My objection to the Equal Rights
Amendment was that legislatures would have nothing to say about
these complex cultural matters, and had no chance to express a
judgment. People would go straight to court and challenge any distinction, and the court would have to write the complete body of
what is allowable, discrimination or whatever it is.
A reasonable basis test allows a little more play in the joints, I
think, for the court to listen to the legislatures and look at the society and bring evidence in and so forth. If you want to say that the
Equal Rights Amendment really would enact the same thing as the reasonable basis test, then my objection to the Equal Rights
Amendment drops out. Senator DECONCINI. What troubles me is that Judge BORK. But nobody said that, Senator. Senator DECONCINI. You are saying to me, as I understand, what you are saying to me is that this reasonable test is
something that the court has made up, that you are willing to use,
and I do not see any distinction in that amendment. It seems to me
far greater to say, "Yes, it applies to women, just as it applies to
the races." Judge BORK. I said that, but it cannot apply just as it does to the
races. It is possible to say Senator DECONCINI. YOU say it can apply just as it does to the
races. Judge BORK. It cannot apply Senator DECONCINI. It cannot. Judge BORK. To gender just as it does to race. It is
possible to say, for example, that there shall be no segregated toilet
facilities anywhere as to race. I do not think anybody wants to say
that as to gender. Differences have to be accommodated. That is
why the difference. Senator DECONCINI. But is not that a bogus argument? We are
not talking about unisex toilets here. We are talking about Judge BORK. NO. Senator DECONCINI. Fundamental rights that
women for too, too long have not been provided. Judge BORK. That is right. Senator DECONCINI. And we are talking about your interpretation of whether or not on the Supreme Court you are going to look
towards that equality for women, whether we have the Equal
Rights Amendment or not. And if you have a reasonable standard
that comes into play for women, because I am referring just to
women or for sex—let us just say the women—but you do not apply
that reasonable standard to racial matters
Judge BORK. I do. Senator, I do. It is exactly the same standard. Senator DECONCINI. YOU do have the standard? Judge BORK. Yes, exactly the same standards, a reasonable basis
test, and there is no reasonable basis to segregate the races by
toilet facilities. There is a reasonable basis to segregate the genders
by those facilities. And when I said to you that you cannot treat
gender exactly the same as you do race, all I meant was some distinctions are reasonable as to gender, such as the one we mentioned, some are not reasonable, the same one would not be reasonable as to race. Senator DECONCINI. But is it not fair that, you know, as you said
in the Griswold case, nobody is going to enforce that statute? Who
is going to come around that they have to use the same
Judge BORK. I did not say anybody was going to do that, Senator.
I was just explaining to you that Senator DECONCINI. But is not that carrying it to an extreme,
Judge Bork?
Judge BORK. NO, Senator. All I am saying to you is that the various things we would prohibit in the law as to race, not all of those
would be prohibited as to gender. Now, for example, you could not
have a national law that said only blacks or only whites will go into combat. It may be—and I do not want to arouse a philosophi­cal argument here, but it certainly seems likely to me that you could have a national law—in fact, the Supreme Court has said as much—saying that only males will go into combat, and, you know, there was a case about whether you could have an all-male draft, and the Supreme Court said you could.
So that is an illustration of the fact that gender in some cases is treated differently from race.
Senator DECONCINI. Let us turn to sex discrimination cases. You know, where is the reasonableness in that area? Is that for the court to decide whether or not eight men and one woman decide that this is a reasonable front? How do you set that standard?
Judge BORK. I think that is exactly what happens. I mean if you put that in court, it is either going to be a bench trial or a jury trial—I suppose a bench trial—and a series of judges will have to decide it on the facts whether that is—if we are talking about a title VII case—whether it is a hostile environment case or discrimi­nation and conditions of employment case.
Senator DECONCINI. And you use a reasonable standard there as far as the Supreme Court is concerned of whether or not to uphold the lower court?
Judge BORK. NO, no. That is a statute. And if there is a disparity in treatment, you have got a violation of the statute.
Senator DECONCINI. But under the 14th amendment you do not find any reasonableness for sex discrimination case if it were brought on that basis?
Judge BORK. The statute applies to private employers, and the 14th amendment applies to government action. And I am not quite sure I understand the questions.
Senator DECONCINI. Well, if you have sex discrimination, an action brought on sex discrimination charging the 14th amend­ment, government action towards the person bringing the action, the reasonable standard applies here?
Judge BORK. Have you got a good reason for the distinction? Is there some good reason for the distinction being made? Now there are a million kinds of judgments to be made about that in many different contexts.
Senator DECONCINI. YOU leave this Senator unsatisfied as to how this Senator can conclude that you are going to protect the citizens of this country in interpreting the Constitution on the court as it relates to sex. And maybe we can go over this some more, Judge BORK. I am not trying to make a federal case or looking for some excuse here. I am trying to satisfy myself that you are not exclud­ing large segments of our population as you clearly do not exclude large segments of our population on the racial issue. But it seems to me that there is a question as to how you treat the sexual segre­gation. And that is a trouble to me, but my time is up.
Judge BORK. Well, let me answer the question nonetheless, Sena­tor, because I would not like to have that implication left in the room.
The fact is—and I was looking for the materials and I cannot find them, but I will get them—the fact is that as Solicitor General I argued positions for the protection of women broader than those
that the Supreme Court would accept.
The other fact is that in the gender cases that I have decided as
a Court of Appeals judge, I have decided more of them in favor of a
female claim than I have the other way, I think substantially
more. There is no reason whatsoever in my record to think that I
have any problem protecting women or any other group. Senator DECONCINI. Well, as Solicitor General, of course, you
know, your client is the government. Judge BORK. Well, sometimes we filed amicus briefs in cases we
did not have to file them. Senator DECONCINI. Well, how many, what percentage is that? Judge BORK. I do not know if I have the figures. Senator DECONCINI. That is not primarily what the Solicitor
General does, is it? Judge BORK. Well, we file a lot of amicus briefs. Senator DECONCINI. Well, is not the main purpose of Solicitor
General to represent the Government? Is not that the primary purpose of that? Judge BORK. He represents the Government and he also represents governmental policies if he thinks they are intellectually
sound and respectable.
Senator DECONCINI. I see a difference as to your position as Solicitor General enforcing some laws and what your interpretation is
going to be as a judge. Judge BORK. Well, let me say this, Senator, there is some bearing
because when the Government is sued—and the Government is my
client, you are right—if there is any way to defend the Government, I will try to defend them. Senator DECONCINI. Sure. Judge BORK. But when I file an amicus brief where no client of
mine is involved, I have not the same obligation to find any way to
do it. But beyond that, on my court of appeals record—and these
are not cases whose results are compelled by Supreme Court precedent—I have voted more often than not for the female party in the
case. There is no, if I may say so—with all respect, there is no ground
in my record anywhere to suspect that I would not protect women
as fully as men. Senator DECONCINI. Well, I am going to have to pursue that a
little bit later, Judge. Thank you. The CHAIRMAN. Judge, before we move on, I want to make sure I
understood two things. In response to one of the questions, you said
the 14th amendment applies to government action not to private
action? Judge BORK. Right. The CHAIRMAN. And the amicus briefs or the cases where you
asked the court to go beyond where it had gone before a Solicitor
General, would you supply those at some point?
Judge BORK. I will. The difficulty is I do not have any books here,
and every time the crucial moment comes I lose the place.
The CHAIRMAN. Look, Judge, I am having trouble finding my
questions. So do you not worry about that? Judge BORK. NO, I am not.
The CHAIRMAN. We will have a couple of hours' break and maybe you could do that.
And, lastly, you said you heard of no arguments about the ninth amendment that would lead you to believe it has some applicability along the lines being discussed, and you cite the Virginia article. Have you read Patterson's "Forgotten Ninth Amendment"?
Judge BORK. No. The ninth amendment has never been a center of my concerns.
The CHAIRMAN. I am not suggesting you should have. I just want to know if you had, because I will not question you on it if you have not read it.
Judge BORK. And the Supreme Court has never relied upon the ninth amendment. The CHAIRMAN. Well, we can talk about that when my time comes.
Senator Grassley, it is now 12 o'clock. And we will go with Sena­tor Grassley. I thought you might want a 5-minute break, but would you rather continue to go, Judge, or would you like a 5­minute break?
Judge BORK. I would just as soon go and then we can have
The CHAIRMAN. Okay. We will go now
Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman, is that going to be the last round before we break?
The CHAIRMAN. Yes, that will be the last round before we break rather than start another round because the President is coming up. So we will break from 12:30 when Senator Grassley finishes, unless any of my colleagues would rather do it another way, and then we will come back at 2:30, and we will start with the Senator from Vermont at that time and then hopefully continue today and we will see where we go from there.
If there is no objection, that is how I would like to proceed. Is that agreeable with you, Judge?
Judge BORK. Certainly, Senator.
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Grassley from Iowa.
Senator GRASSLEY. First of all, I do not know whether it makes much difference if you read the "Forgotten Ninth Amendment" or not because it was written in 1954 and a lot has developed since. The CHAIRMAN. I was just curious, Senator. It was not an accusa­tion. Calm down; it was just a question.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, first of all, I want to congratulate you on your openness to answering questions. It is a breath of fresh air to have somebody like you before us who is willing to answer these questions. You are the fourth Supreme Court nominee that I have had the opportunity to evaluate. I want to express my appre­ciation for the depth to which you are willing to go in responding to our questions.
This gets me to my initial questions regarding your views. These may not seem appropriate, compared to the questions you have been asked. But you know that there has been a debate raging over the past 2 months over the Senate's advise and consent role. All the committee members have weighed in with their views on what our proper role is. This may be an uncomfortable question, but, given your preeminence as an interpreter of the Constitution and, because as a judge, you must decide between two views all the
time, I am wondering if I can hear your view on what article II,
section 3 of the Constitution means.
Judge BORK. I think to begin with the obvious meaning is that
you can judge a candidate's intelligence, temperament, integrity,
and so forth, and relevant background. I think it is also clear that
you can judge a candidate's judicial philosophy. But I think it
would be quite wrong to say, "Well, I agree with him but there is
one crucial case that he might decide the wrong way and therefore I will not confirm him."
I think given the nature of the structure of the nominating proc­ess and the confirmation process and the structure of the bodies involved, the Senate should assure itself that the candidate's judicial
philosophy is a respectable one and one that is allowable on the bench in the United States.
Senator GRASSLEY. IS it significant that the power of judicial ap­pointment is in Article II, the Executive function, rather than in Article I, the Legislative function?
Judge BORK. I think it is, Senator. I think it means that the framers were quite worried about the idea that a large legislative
body might engage in nepotism and so forth. Whether they were right or not, I do not know, but they were worried about it.
And I think it means that the Senate's function is not to pick candidates with rifle-shot accuracy, that is to say, no, we do not
like those seven people but if you will nominate him or her, we will
confirm." I think the Senate's function is to decide whether some­body is in a certain range.
Senator GRASSLEY. IS it significant that the framers inserted a two-thirds approval requirement for advise and consent on treaties
proposed by the President, but made no such vote requirement for Executive appointments?
Judge BORK. I suppose it is, but I am not sure—I have not looked into that, but I suppose it means that they were more concerned
about foreign entanglements and the kinds of troubles the Presi­dent might get us into.
Senator GRASSLEY. HOW deferential do you believe the framers intended the Senate to be toward executive appointments? Judge BORK. I wish I could say that I thought it was extremely deferential, but I have no idea how deferential they meant it to be.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, when you were a law professor, you criticized the Supreme Court's reverse discrimination holding in the Bakke case. Critics charge that this is evidence of your in­sensitivity to racial minorities. Justice Powell wrote the opinion. Did any other member of the court join Powell's opinion?
Judge BORK. NO. All eight members of the court went off on dif­ferent grounds. Nobody agreed with Justice Powell in that case.
And I must say he put the case on first amendment grounds, and I
think nobody was satisfied with that.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, then there was no majority opinion?
Judge BORK. NO, there was no majority opinion.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, 4 years before Bakke, in the DeFunis case, the Supreme Court was faced with another preferential admissions program in higher education. Although the court held the DeFunis case moot, Justice Douglas reached the merits of the case. He wrote views opposing reliance on racial criteria even for
benign purposes, and he insisted that the 14th amendment re­quired, and I quote, "the consideration of each application in a ra­cially neutral way".
Is my recap of the DeFunis case accurate?
Judge BORK. As I recall it, Senator, yes.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, have your writings as a law pro­fessor about this case generally followed this view articulated by perhaps the most liberal Justice of the 20th century?
Judge BORK. Yes, I think generally I have certainly objected to race. Now, when you get into use of race as a criterion for remedial purposes, that is a different kind of animal. I do not think I took a constitutional position, but I was quite worried about the use of race for a long time as—that is, I used to think if there was a tran­sition period as we brought a certain racial group into the main­stream of American life, using race as a criterion might be all right. But what I was afraid of as a policy matter was that the preferences would never go away and it would become a perma­nent feature of American life, causing a lot of resentments and causing other groups to demand the same preferences.
But I have never really written about the subject at length.
Senator GRASSLEY. Let me ask you a follow-up question on the self-contradiction of racial quotas. I would like to quote from Pro­fessor Bickel's. "Morality of Consent" at Page 133, and I quote:
"The lesson of the great decisions of the Supreme Court and the lesson of contemporary history have been the same for at least a generation. Discrimination on the basis of race is illegal, immoral, unconstitutional, inherently wrong, and destructive of democratic society." Now, this is to be unlearned, and we are told that this is not a matter of fundamental principle but only a matter of whose ox is being gored.
Continuing to quote, "Those for whom racial equality was de­manded are to be more equal than others. Having found support in the Constitution for equality, they now claim support for inequality under the same Constitution."
Do you share these views?
Judge BORK. Well, of course, they are more strongly expressed than I usually write, Senator, as we have learned. But as a policy matter, any long-run institution of quotas worries me very much. As a constitutional matter or a statutory matter, I do not think I should express an opinion because I assume that kind of thing may be litigated in any court I happen to be on in the future.
And I think I have made it plain enough—well, I wrote what I thought about the policy in "Regulation" magazine, so there is no point in me saying I do not have a policy view. But I think I have made it plain that my policy views do not determine my statutory or constitutional views.
Senator GRASSLEY. NOW, I would like to turn to the principle of judicial restraint, and I want to ask you a question that was put to Justice Fortas during his confirmation hearings to be Chief Justice in 1968; and I quote:
"To what extent and under what circumstances do you believe the Supreme Court should attempt to bring about social, economic, or political change?"
Judge BORK. Is that the question, Senator, to which Mr. Justice
Fortas said, "Zero, absolutely zero"? I seem to remember it. Senator GRASSLEY. Basically, yes. He said none. Judge BORK. That requires some qualification. If the social
change is mandated by a principle in the Constitution or in a statute, then the Court should go ahead and bring about social change.
Brown v. Board of Education brought about enormous social
change, and quite properly. If the social change is the judge's idea of what would be a nice
social change, then Justice Fortas' answer is correct: Zero. Senator GRASSLEY. OK. Well, now, Justice Fortas said that. Obviously, he was very much a judicial activist. What can you do to
convince me, then, that if you take that same point of view, you
really mean it and are going to follow it? Judge BORK. I do not know how I could. You could look at my
record so far. That is about all I can advise. Otherwise, I really
cannot afford to give you a bond or anything like that so that I
could forfeit it if I become an activist. Senator GRASSLEY. I think you can sense some of the problems
we deal with as we try to categorize people too much. But each of
us, you know, has some views of the kind of people we like on the
Supreme Court, and obviously I have expressed some satisfaction
with some of your points of view already. Judge BORK. Well, I guess I can say this, Senator: For 16 years, I
have been saying one thing about the Court's function; that it has
to be guided by the intention of the lawmaker with appropriate respect for precedent. I have been saying that for 16 years in articles,
in speeches, and in my opinions, and I am saying it here. If I got on
the Supreme Court and began to do anything else, I would be a
laughingstock. I would make a fool of myself in history for having
done that. I suppose that is the best guarantee I can give you. Senator GRASSLEY. Again, on the issue of judicial activism, there
was a recent nominee to the federal court, and he happened to be, I
am sorry to say, put forward by this administration. And this
nominee once wrote in a "Law Day" article about things that "we
ought to be thankful for in our legal system." Among them, he
said, was "lawmaking by the courts," and those are his words.
Here is what he wrote about that, and I quote again. "There is nothing new about this and nothing truly conservative
about people who decry it. The centuries old tradition of the
common law is that law is changed and new law is made by judges.
They should continue to do so." Can you give me your thoughts on such a statement? And I trust
that you would disagree with such a demonstration of judicial imperialism.
Judge BORK. Which branch of law was he addressing himself to?
Constitutional law as a form of common law or what? Senator GRASSLEY. Basically, yes. Judge BORK. Well, I am not quite sure what the gentleman
means, whoever he is. But if he means that the courts are free to
evolve constitutional law and establish principles that are not in
the Constitution, then quite clearly I disagree with him. If he
means that starting from something like the free speech clause of
the first amendment that the courts will, in fact, and must evolve the meaning of that clause in something like a common law development, then I agree. But the whole question is whether there is a
basic premise in the Constitution which the judge is working out or
whether there is not. It sounds like he means there is not but they
should go ahead anyway, with which I disagree. Senator GRASSLEY. I would like to follow up on what is wrong
with judges making law, because I think you just expressed your
view. But there are other points of view on the same issue. There
seems to be at least two; although there are probably many more
arguments advanced why judges ought to be able to make law. One
is that judges are an "elite" of our society, better educated than
the masses, best able to protect society from itself. A second argument often used is that judges have a duty to protect all those who
are under-represented in the political process. May I have your analysis of these arguments about judicial imperialism? Judge BORK. Well, the first argument is one that is very commonly made by those who do not believe in original intent but believe in a judge creating constitutional values by the method of
moral philosophy, say. There are a lot of academics who believe
that. The usual ground for that is that judges are better at matters
of principle than legislators are; that legislators are better at matters of expediency than judges are. Senator GRASSLEY. Let me be more definite in what I am trying
to get at here. Judge BORK. OK. Senator GRASSLEY. Are any of these arguments persuasive
enough in your mind to allow a judge to make law? Judge BORK. Absolutely not. That is a much shorter answer than
the one I started to give. Senator GRASSLEY. Let me ask you this: Do not legislatures do
dumb things sometimes, and are not the courts sometimes the only
institutions in a position to protect society from such laws? Judge BORK. I am bound to say, Senator, yes, they do dumb
things sometimes. And often those dumb things are unconstitutional. Senator GRASSLEY. That is not a reason for making-up a new
Constitution, is it? Judge BORK. That is not a reason for making up a new Constitution, no. There is no clause in the Constitution that says the legislatures shall make no dumb law. Senator GRASSLEY, I want to now ask you about another issue
that has been brought before us. Do you change your mind too
much, or do you have the ability to change your mind at all? Of
course, judges are not robots. They have the ability to rethink their
views over time and change their minds. From that standpoint, obviously, they are similar to Senators because we change our minds
all the time. So I want to focus on your ability to change your mind on important issues. One example I am aware of is your position on the
public accommodations provisions of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. I
think Senator Simpson yesterday reminded us that there are three
members of the Senate who voted against that Act and now have
changed their minds about it as well.
What other legal issues can you identify for me where you have
rethought your views and have publicly come to different conclusions? Judge BORK. Well, in 1968, as I mentioned, I endorsed a version
of lawmaking under the Constitution by the Supreme Court. In
1971, I had become convinced that I was quite wrong, and I published the Indiana article, the main thrust of which was that I take
back what I said in "Fortune"; that is wrong, and I will tell you
why it is wrong. And I did. In the second half of the Indiana article, I said, admittedly as a
speculative, tentative view—and I explained why I took that position—that maybe the Constitution protected only explicitly political speech. I have explained why I have decided that was wrong.
Indeed, more than wrong; it was an example of a professor doing
what legislatures sometimes do—being dumb. It was a dumb idea. I
published it. I have dropped that. The CHAIRMAN. When did you drop that idea? Judge BORK. Oh, in class right away. I think maybe in my 1982
confirmation hearings I indicated that I had dropped it, and then
somebody wrote an article in the ABA Journal characterizing my
views. It was not an article. It was that browser's page or something. And I wrote a rather stiff letter about that. That was a pure professor's exercise. As soon as I was faced with
the counterarguments and the reality, it collapsed. That part of it
collapsed. I still think, I must say, that much of that article is quite
good. I like it. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. Senator GRASSLEY. Would you ever see yourself like Justice Stewart, who dissented in the Griswold case regarding the right to privacy issue, and then 7 or 8 years later, he joined in the majority in
Roe v. Wade? Do you see yourself able to make those sorts of
changes?Judge BORK. Well, I suppose I could if I became convinced, sure,
that I was wrong the first time. I have changed my mind on
cases Senator GRASSLEY. But he necessarily says he was wrong the first
time. It was a case of the passage of time, and maybe the privacy
argument was carrying greater weight? Judge BORK. I do not know why he did it exactly. But I have
changed my mind in the same case over there. I have written opinions for a panel, got a petition for rehearing, reheard it, and realized I was wrong and come out the other way. I have done that
two, three, four times. Senator GRASSLEY. Yesterday, on another issue, Senator Thurmond questioned you about the importance of precedent. I would
like to follow up on that, and I want to refer to a statement made
by Justice Rehnquist when he appeared before this committee. I
quote, "A precedent might not be that authoritative if it has stood
for a shorter period of time or if it were the decision of a sharply
divided court."
I want to know if you might agree with that view?
Judge BORK. Well, I think in some part I do—yes, in major part I
do. I suppose the passage of time by itself is not important. The
only reason it is important is that if expectations and institutions
and laws and so forth have grown up around the decision in that
passage of time. That certainly weighs in favor of not overruling
the decision. In a very short period of time, obviously, things are
unlikely to have occurred.
On the other hand, the Court, I think, tends to lose confidence if
it starts overruling cases that it decided 6 months or 1 year ago
just because the personnel is changed. It is a complex question of
when to overrule, and I do not know that I have a philosophy. I
know that I do not. I know the factors I would consider, some of
them. I have never read a theory of when to overrule and when not
to overrule a precedent that had any firmness to it. People just discuss various factors. Senator GRASSLEY. I think you commented well on how long a precedent has stood. What about on the issue of how sharply divid­ed the Court might be?
Judge BORK. You mean the first time?
Senator GRASSLEY. Yes, and commenting on what Justice Rehn­quist said.
Judge BORK. Well, I suppose that would have some weight. On the first point, Plessy v. Ferguson, which allowed segregation, was 58 years old when it was overruled, and a lot of customs and insti­tutions had grown up around segregation. So that is not a disposi­tive point. I guess Plessy was a sharply divided Court. I cannot recall right now.
But I would think that a sharp division in the Court would lessen the weight of the precedent somewhat, but not dispositively. Senator GRASSLEY. I think you have commented on that. I want to go on to another point. You are probably tired of having us ask questions about the Griswold case, but probably much needs to be said. In Griswold, Justice Black, in dissent, wrote that the ninth amendment was passed to assure the people that the Constitution was intended to limit the federal government to the powers ex­pressly granted to it, or by implication necessary for it to operate. Yesterday, Senator Thurmond asked you about the purpose of the
ninth amendment.
Let me ask you this: In more than 150 years between enactment of the ninth amendment and the Griswold case, had the Supreme
Court ever used the ninth amendment as a weapon of federal
power to prevent State legislatures from passing laws they considered necessary?
Judge BORK. I believe the Court had never, and I believe the Court to this day has never done so. I think only a concurrence by
Justice Goldberg really relied upon the ninth amendment in the
Griswold case. It has just never been an amendment that the Court
has ever found to have much force, just as they have not found the
10th amendment to have much force. Senator GRASSLEY. SO then the Griswold case was a rather radi­cal decision in terms of the history of Supreme Court jurispru­dence?
Judge BORK. Oh, the Griswold case was an enormous innovation, yes. It was a radical departure from what they had been doing. Senator GRASSLEY. I have a question I want to ask about the 10th
amendment. The 10th amendment states, as we all know, "The
powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution nor
prohibited by it to the States are reserved to the States respectively
and to the people." Now, everybody is going to agree that that is a worthy amendment. However, what was intended to act as an obstacle to expanded federal authority has become, in the words of the Supreme
Court, only a "truism". What does the 10th amendment mean to you today? Judge BORK. Well, I think, Senator, that is unfortunately part of
what I was discussing when I was discussing the fact that the commerce clause is expanded in ways that it is simply too late for a
judge to go back and tear up. I think the framers and the ratifiers
had a rather clear idea that these powers were limited and had
kind of clear contours to them. Indeed, the Government operated
that way for a while, for a long while. But the fact is, beginning with the Civil War up through the
New Deal, the idea that those powers were limited and not really
national in scope got lost. Now, we are operating in a fashion in
which the 10th amendment, I am sorry to say, has almost no practical significance, and I do not really see how it can much, given
what has happened to the way the Nation has grown. Senator GRASSLEY. Well, let me ask you this: Would you disagree
with the Supreme Court's 1985 decision in Garcia v. San Antonio? Judge BORK. Well, I should not speak to that, for two reasons.
One is I do not know, and two is I should not speak to it even if I
did know. The third one is I argued and lost the case that Garcia
overruled as Solicitor General. I tried to uphold a federal regulation of state wages and hours. It was a congressional statute, and I
went in to defend it. I was the first Solicitor General in 40 years to
lose a commerce clause case. Then after I lost it, they went and
overrule it. I cannot really, I think, speak, Senator Grassley, to what I would
do in a similar case. Senator GRASSLEY. The question has been raised about you
taking the place of Justice Powell, and his kind of being a swing
vote on the Court and what that might do to the Court. I would
like to ask you—and maybe you cannot comment about this
either—about Justice Powell's dissent in Garcia. How do you relate
yourself and your philosophy to Justice Powell's dissent? Judge BORK. The most that I can say, I think, properly, Senator,
is that I have sometimes thought—and I suggested to the Supreme
Court in the National League of Cities case which Garcia overruled—that there were ways in which the Court could defend federalism as a constitutional value, but those ways are quite limited
now. And exactly what a Court can do, I do not know, and I really
should not express an opinion on Garcia and National League of
Cities out of propriety, and also because I really have not got an
opinion.Senator GRASSLEY. At least the Garcia case overruled a precedent. Judge BORK. Oh, yes. Senator GRASSLEY. I have only 1 or 2 minutes left. Judge BORK. Garcia overruled a precedent, Senator, and the case
it overruled had just overruled another precedent. So it was going
back and forth pretty fast there.
Senator GRASSLEY. I want to ask you a question about the death penalty, and this will have to be my last question. I do not think there is any doubt about it. My own personal political philosophy is that I would agree with you that since the Constitution specifically refers to the death penalty, it is obviously an available sanction for heinous crimes. I also note the argument of some that since the standard of what constitutes cruel and unusual punishment is an evolving one, there is no place for the death penalty in today's soci­ety. That is the other argument.
I want to know whether or not you buy the argument that the eighth amendment standard is an evolving one?
Judge BORK. Well, if it is, Senator, I take it if that statement has any meaning, it means that society itself, not the judges but the American people itself have evolved their moral views so that this thing becomes wrong. If that is true, statutes will reflect that fact, and the death penalty will be repealed.
If it is not true, then judges ought not to apply their own evolv­ing morality.
Senator METZENBAUM. Senator Grassley, I think we are all due on the floor. It is 12:30. If you have additional questions, I do not know if you have additional time. I am not the timekeeper. But under the circumstances, Judge Bork, I think the Chair has previ­ously announced we will reconvene at 2:30. We will look forward to seeing you at that time.
The CHAIRMAN. I agree with the new Chairman. Thank you very much.
Judge BORK. Thank you.
Senator KENNEDY. We will come to order.
Senator Biden has been necessarily detained for a few moments. To move the hearing along, we will recognize the Senator from Vermont, Senator Leahy.
Senator LEAHY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, welcome back. I do not know if you were attending the celebration of the Constitution. If you were not, I hope you had a cooler place to spend the noon hour than those who were out there.
Judge Bork, I am interested not so much in one specific case, but just how your own thinking has evolved over the years and what
we might anticipate, knowing that there are no ironclad guarantees when any judge goes on the bench, nor should there be. But
Senator Simpson had said earlier this morning that you are in a
different position than if a totally unknown person were to come
here who had never written on anything or anything else. And
that is true. You are one of the most prolific writers I have ever
seen. And having spent a good part of the month of August in Vermont reading your writings, there were days that I wished you had
perhaps not been so prolific, and perhaps days that you wish the
same.
Judge BORK. I share that sentiment, Senator.
Senator LEAHY. I am sure you do.
But I would hope that no President would send up somebody who
is a total tabula rasa. I would not want any President to show what
would be almost disdain for the Supreme Court to nominate any
man or woman, no matter how brilliant, who had no views ever expressed in the law. So I think it is good for us and for the country
that if the President is going to send a name up, he sends somebody with a large body of writings behind him in the field that he will be deciding.
Let me first go over a few things. You said yesterday, in effect, that you believe that there is not a constitutional underpinning to
the Supreme Court's opinion striking down a ban on contraception.
You said yesterday that there is no constitutional underpinning to
the Supreme Court's opinion striking down racially restrictive covenants, and that there is no constitutional underpinning to the Supreme Court's opinion upholding the principle of one person, one
vote. In fact, you set forth all those views in your Indiana Law Journal article.
So I would like to ask you, now that we have talked about your views on those three areas, your views on the Supreme Court's decisions in another area—in fact, the main focus of your article, the
area of freedom of speech. I would like to take as my starting
point—and I would like to see the evolution, if there is one, of your
views in this area—the starting point the 1971 Indiana Law Review
which you entitled "Neutral Principles and Some First Amend­ment Problems."
I am using that for a number of reasons. First, the article is well written; its arguments are clearly stated. Whether one agrees or
not with the arguments, we know specifically what they are. I
think this is probably cited more often in Law Reviews and by
courts than any of the rest of your articles. In fact, I think it is sort
of in the top 10 or 12 of the articles most cited by any author of Law Review articles.
I understand it represents the most comprehensive statement of your philosophy of the Constitution. Am I correct on those points
so far?
Judge BORK. Yes. I wrote primarily in antitrust, and this consti­tutional law was something I wrote in from time to time. Senator LEAHY. It is also an area that naturally focuses the attention not only of the Senate, but certainly the country, and your feelings there, if you were to go on the Supreme Court.
Let us start with the first amendment and the right of free speech mentioned in the Indiana article. On Page 20 you say, "Constitutional protection should be accorded only to speech that is explicitly political. There is no basis for judicial intervention to protect any other form of expression, be it scientific, literary, or that
variety of expression we call obscene or pornographic. Moreover,
within that category of speech we ordinarily call political, there
should be no constitutional obstruction to laws making criminal
any speech that advocates forcible overthrow of the Government or
the violation of the law." That is basically an accurate statement of what you have in there.
Judge BORK. Yes. That was my theoretical position at that time.
Senator LEAHY. Then in 1986, March 7, 1986, you spoke at a
forum on the political process and the first amendment before the Federalist Society at Stanford, and you provided the committee
with a transcript. Your Law Review article was mentioned by the
moderator, and you responded as follows: "Dean Ely has been kind
enough to mention my past writing, such as the article in the Indiana Law Review, which—I have been confirmed twice now, and I
have had to eat that article page by page both times." Is that correct? Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator LEAHY. NOW, I recognize a tad of levity in your saying
that, but you said about the same thing in an interview on USIA
Worldnet a few months ago this year. Judge BORK. Well, I do not recall what I said in that interview. I
was talking to a group of German professors whom I could not see.
I forget what I said in that interview. Senator LEAHY. Well, then, let me not then hold you to that
interview. Let me just go back. What did you mean when you said
earlier with Dean Ely, "I have been confirmed twice, and I have
had to eat that article page by page both times"? Judge BORK. Well, I am sorry, Senator, that was a bit of hyperbole. But I have eaten selected paragraphs of that article. This is one
right here that you point to that I guess I am going to eat again. Senator LEAHY. Well, no, I am not Judge BORK. Well, no, I mean that. I am not just being funny. I
mean it. Senator LEAHY. Well, we discussed this just a slight bit in my
office, but let me go back just to do sort of the chronology. I do this,
Judge, and if at any point I am taking a part that you feel is at all
out of context, you just say so and I will go back to that. I would like to follow a chronology, if I might, on how you have
done it. Let us go back to some of the confirmation hearings where
I think you have shown some differing with that article, or at least
where the article has been brought up. In January 1973, you appeared before this committee as the
nominee for Solicitor General, and Senator Tunney, then of California, read to you an extract from that article in which you said,
"Explicitly political speech does not cover scientific, educational,
commercial or literary expressions as such. A novel may have
impact upon attitudes that affects politics, but it would not for that
reason receive judicial protection." And Senator Tunney had asked you how you relate that to how
you feel about recent Supreme Court articles, and you said, "The
article you have there is explicitly a tentative and rather theoretical attempt to deal with the problem. At the end of the article, I
point out that I think these are the conclusions that are required
by the idea of neutral principles, but that I am not sure about the
whole subject." Was that a retraction of the Indiana article?
Judge BORK. That part of it. That part of it, Senator, yes.
Senator LEAHY. HOW far would you say you have moved from the
Indiana article in that 1973 period?
Judge BORK. About to where the Supreme Court currently is. Let
me say this: The Indiana article was not my starting point on free
speech. I started off on free speech in a very liberal way, protecting
almost everything. This was an attempt to ask in what sense is
86-974 0 - 89 - 11
speech different from other human activities which can be regulated. I took Justice Brandeis' opinion from Whitney v. California, I
believe, in which he said, in effect, there are four functions of
speech: the development of the faculties of the individual, the happiness to be derived from engaging in the activity, and the provi­sion of a safety valve for society.
And I suggested that those functions—the development of the faculties and the happiness—were not different from other human
activities that develop your faculties and make you happy. And the
provision of a safety valve was really a legislative matter, and I
said the discovery and spread of political truth is the only unique
function of speech that it does not share with other human activi­ties. So I tried to find a bright line.
The bright line, I have become convinced, particularly since sit­ting on first amendment free speech cases on the court, the bright
line is impossible. To say that somebody has to speak explicitly politically, you know, it is like saying somebody who wants to discuss
a major issue in moral terms is protected only if he says, "And,
therefore, let us pass a law." Now, that is just silly, and the more I thought about it, the sillier it became.
I do not think a bright line test is available in this area. It is a spectrum. Furthermore, as another professor pointed out to me, the
realm of politics extends much more through life than it used to,
particularly in part because of the spread of government throughout life. So that the area of what is political or what affects politics
has expanded enormously, and fiction affects it and so forth and so
on. Now, I have expanded to where I am about where the current
Supreme Court is, but let me say this: In this same article, I committed what I think is a logical fallacy. I said that political speech
would have to be protected even if there were no first amendment,
because the framers constructed a republican form of government,
great care about elections, terms of office and so forth and so on.
To have a government like that, without free political speech, would be an anomaly. It would be nonsense.
But I did not draw the correct conclusion from that. If political speech would have to be protected anyway, then why did they put
the first amendment in? And why did they speak of freedom of the
press which is not restricted to political speech? I am afraid I have
to conclude that the category has to be much broader than I made it then. And my decision shows it.
Senator LEAHY. Yet you say in it that while there is no bright line still, which is a moving away from your basic premise back in
1971, you still say that it has got to be political speech.
Judge BORK. I do not think so, Senator. I say that I think it is
generally true. Harry Kalven, one of the great scholars of the first
amendment at the University of Chicago, and Alexander Meiklejohn, another one of the great scholars of the first amendment, all
start with political speech as the core of the amendment: the idea
that there may be no such thing as seditious libel against the Government, that that is inconsistent with our form of government
and the first amendment. But they move out from there.
Senator LEAHY. Are you saying, then, that there are first amendment rights outside the core of political speech?
Judge BORK. Oh, sure. Certainly. Senator LEAHY. Well, then that differs markedly, does it not,
from your 1971 article? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator LEAHY. Well, let us go back, then, to when that came
about. You did not differ markedly in 1973 when you spoke to Sen­ator Tunney.
Judge BORK. I think there is a difference there. I think I was saying it spreads out, did I not? I have not got it before me, but I think you have read it and suggested it was something of a change.
Senator LEAHY. I think it is. You said in your article, let us take it step by step. In 1971, you say these remarked are intended to be tentative and exploratory, but then you go on to say, "Yet at this moment I do not see how I can avoid the conclusions stated."
You then go on, when you are talking with Senator Tunney, you told him, "It seems to me as you move out from there"—speaking of political speech—"that first amendment claims may still exist, but certainly by the time they reach the area of pornography and so forth, the claim of first amendment protection become somewhat tenuous."
Now, that seems to me to say only that there may exist some­thing beyond the area of political speech. Now, is there not a huge realm of material that is neither political nor pornographic?
Judge BORK. I hope so, because I do not spend my time reading either of those two. Senator LEAHY. Let me go to—I am sorry. You were going to say you do not spend your time reading either one? Judge BORK. All my reading material is not one or the other, so I hope there is a category in there. Senator LEAHY. Well, what about most of the books on the best­seller list? Are they protected? Judge BORK. I do not read those, Senator, but I assume they are
protected. Senator LEAHY. All of them? Judge BORK. I do not know what is on the bestseller list, and I
certainly have not read them. Senator LEAHY. Well, what kind of a book might not be? Judge BORK. Pornography. Senator LEAHY. What about something that advocated the violation of laws?
Judge BORK. Well, you know, the Supreme Court has come to the Brandenburg position—which is okay; it is a good position—which is that you cannot be prosecuted for advocating violation of the law unless lawless action is imminent, or imminent lawless action may be caused. That is a good test, and it is very unlikely that the pub­lication of a book advocating violation of the law would produce im­minent lawless action. It would have to be a very powerful book to have people
Senator LEAHY. Well, what about speech of a person? What about Martin Luther King suggesting civil disobedience?
Judge BORK. Well, there are two aspects to that, Senator. One is that Martin Luther King, as I understand it, was usually advocat­ing civil disobedience in order to test a law, like the segregation law, and he did it under a claim of constitutional right.
Now, in our system it is often true that the only way one can get
a constitutional ruling on a law is to violate the law, and I think
that was a lot of what Martin Luther King was doing. And if you
do, obviously, test the law and the law is held unconstitutional, I
do not see how the person who advocated breaking it could be held
liable. Senator LEAHY. Could you have a law that would say that it
would be illegal in the first instance to advocate the violation of
that law? Judge BORK. I do not think so. It seems to me that if the attempt is by a person or a group to challenge the constitutionality of a
law, then I do not see how it can be made illegal to advocate that
attempt.Senator LEAHY. What if they advocated the violation of a law to
test its constitutionality and the constitutionality was upheld? Judge BORK. I really do not know how that would come out. I really do not know how that would come out. Senator LEAHY. Let us go back and take a variant of that. You have a law on the books, let us say, that says that you cannot advocate disobedience of a law, for whatever reason. Judge BORK. I think the law is unconstitutional because Senator LEAHY. Even if the law that they then advocate disobeying turns out to be constitutional? Judge BORK. Well, I do not know. Now, we are into an area I have never worked in or thought about. But let me say this: If you
are advocating a constitutional test—and you are right—I think
that case is clear. If you are not advocating a constitutional test,
then I think the Supreme Court's Brandenburg decision applies.
That says if you are advocating lawless action and it is imminent
that it will occur, the speech is not protected. Senator LEAHY. Well> I still am having some difficulty knowing just how your thinking has changed, indeed whether it has, on this
area of free speech. When you were here for the court of appeals
confirmation hearing in January of 1982, Senator Thurmond asked
you about what you said about free speech in the 1971 article. You
answered that you were engaged in an academic exercise, a theoretical argument. Judge BORK. That is exactly what it was. Senator LEAHY. And that is your feeling today? Judge BORK. Pardon me? Senator LEAHY. That is your feeling today? Judge BORK. Oh, yes. Senator LEAHY. Does that mean it did not state your views? Judge BORK. Pardon me? Senator LEAHY. Does that mean the article did not state your
views? Judge BORK. NO, no. That was a theory I worked out, and it seemed good to me then. But I recognized that it was pretty far off
current doctrine, and I was not entirely comfortable with it. But it
seemed to me that if you followed this idea of neutral principles,
then you can apply the principle of protection, I thought, only to
that aspect of speech which is different from other human activity.
That is just wrong. But that is what I was doing at the time.
Senator LEAHY. Well, that is where I have the problem, Judge,
because you also told Senator Thurmond that "It seems to me that
the application of the concept of neutral principles to the first
amendment reaches the result I reached," referring back to the
1971 article. Now, if you say the 1971 article is wrong, and yet you
are in favor of applying the concept of neutral principles, you say
it reaches the result that you reached. Does that not reaffirm what you just discarded?
Judge BORK. I do not think so. Oh, oh, you have to apply a principle that is awfully large to get to that result in 1971. And that
principle would be that all forms of human action which seem in
some sense similar to the judge must be treated similarly. I do not
think that is true. I think, in fact, legislatures and judges have
much narrower principles that they deal with, and they can still be
neutral. What I was dealing with here was rather cosmic, I think. In any event, Senator, I would suggest that my decisions on the
court of appeals in the first amendment area do not suggest at all a
restricted view of the first amendment. Senator LEAHY. But your decisions in first amendment areas
have been in areas of political speech, have they not? Judge BORK. Well, you can call them—one of them is a newspaper column and I said it was a political subject. It was not a political speech. Nobody was advocating doing anything. It was just sort
of a matter of public, political interest. And I also applied the commercial speech doctrine in a case. Senator LEAHY. YOU applied it—I did not hear what you said—
you applied itJudge BORK. I applied the doctrine that protects commercial
speech in a case. Senator LEAHY. And tell us about that case. Judge BORK. Well, I think it was a tobacco advertising case. That
is all I can recall about it, Brown and Williamson. That is all I can
recall about it, off-hand, but I can find out about it and let you
know more about it. The fact is, Senator, I simply do not have a
narrow view of the first amendment's protection of speech. Senator LEAHY. DO you agree then, with the Brandenburg case? Judge BORK. Yes, I do. I will tell you—the other thing I should
say that moved me somewhat in 1971 about incendiary speech was
that I had just been through, in fact, was still going through the
student revolution at Yale, in which speech advocating law violation and violence was rampant and we had three episodes of arson
in the law school, one in which they burned books in the library. I
suppose that experience made me perhaps a little less happy than I
would have been otherwise, but I realize that we have to put up
with that and it is constitutionally protected. Senator LEAHY. I can remember my days as a prosecutor during
some of those same demonstrations at the University of Vermont.
Let's go back to Brandenburg. When you say that you agree with
that decision, that has not always been your position, has it? Judge BORK. NO, it has not. Senator LEAHY. Didn't you and Mr. Bickel write a law review article saying that the Brandenburg case was a fundamentally wrong
interpretation of the first amendment?
Judge BORK. The same article here?
Senator LEAHY. I am speaking of the article, "The Individual, the
State and the First Amendment," written by you and Alexander
Bickel, in which you say on page 21, "Hess and Brandenburg are
fundamentally wrong interpretations of the First Amendment. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator LEAHY. SO, at that point you thought it was wrong but
today you feel it is right? Judge BORK. Well, there is obviously a question of how much
chance you are willing to take. Now, if you have speech advocating
violence or forcible overthrow of the Government, it is possible to
say we will take a chance and, unless the imminent danger of violence or something of that sort is here, we will protect the speech
that is also possible to say, and at the time I was thinking about
and had discussed with Bickel, the fact—relied upon by Holmes in
his Gitlow opinion—the fact that we tend to think that some of
these folks are insignificant and I suppose in America they are. But I was thinking about the fact that I knew of another nation
where funny little men in raincoats, wearing mustaches, were
standing on the corner advocating forcible overthrow and nobody
took them seriously and we got a Nazi regime. I do not think that
is a real problem in America, so I think we can afford to have a
wide first amendment protection of the sort that Brandenburg supplies. Senator LEAHY. Without going into the specific case—I know in
some of this I may have to go back on my next round so I can
follow just where you are going without going into a back pattern
now, at one point you felt the Brandenburg case was a fundamentally wrong interpretation of the first amendment. Today you feel
it is right. Judge BORK. It is right.Senator LEAHY. In 1982, at your confirmation hearing, you testified that you still agreed with the conclusions you reached in the
1971 article. Is that correct? Judge BORK. I think—I do not have that here, Senator, but I
think you said that if one follows that application of neutral principles, which I was then discussing, one comes to that. I think that is
true, if you take neutral principles in the largest, most philosophic
sense. But I do not think we should anymore. Senator LEAHY. Let's go on to that. Let's move up a year later. In
1983, Jamie Kalven wrote an article which you are obviously well-
familiar with, criticizing your free speech views from 1971, 12 years
before. There has been a lot of discussion about it in the Nation
magazine. After a summary of the article appeared in the ABA
Journal, you wrote a letter to the editor in which you stated—I will
summarize, but I think it's an accurate summary—"Jamie Kalven's summary of my views is both out of date and seriously mistaken. I do not think, for example, that first amendment protections should apply only to speech that is explicitly political. As a
result of the responses of scholars to my article, I have long since
concluded that many other forms of discourse, such as moral and
scientific debate, are central to a democratic government and deserve protection. I have repeatedly stated this position in my classes." Is that a pretty accurate summary of the way you reacted to
the Jamie Kalven article?
Judge BORK. Yes, Senator, but I should say one thing. I never read the Jamie Kalven article. I only read the summary of it that was given in the ABA Journal.
Senator LEAHY. Well, maybe I should say, is that a pretty accu­rate statement of your views, the way I read it?
Judge BORK. Well, it is. It does not take in all the forms of speech that would be protected, but it clearly states that it is not just political speech and I think I go on to say that I do not think this rationale requires protection of pornography.
The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up, but in order to let the Judge continue, we will finish this line, but do not go to a new question, okay. Continue so we do not cut off what the Judge means.
Senator LEAHY. I am sorry. I thought I started at
The CHAIRMAN. Maybe I am wrong.
Senator LEAHY. NO, they have got the timer. Judge, maybe just in your The CHAIRMAN. I beg your pardon. You have five more minutes. I am sorry. I was mistaken. Five more minutes. Senator LEAHY. Were you starting to say something? Did we cut you off? Judge BORK. I do not recall now. I think we will have to recon­struct it.
Senator LEAHY. Well, let me go back to another question and ob­viously, we are going to have another time around and you are going to have a chance to see the notes and transcripts of this and if you thought you did not get a chance to answer something fully, naturally we will go back to it. But, have you ever before made a statement that you felt Hess and Brandenburg was right?
Judge BORK. Not in public. Hess? Which case is Hess?
Senator LEAHY. Well, let's just stick to Brandenburg. Hess v. In­diana was a case where there had been an antiwar demonstra­tor
Judge BORK. Well, this is a case of obscenity.
Senator LEAHY. Who blocked a public street. He had told either the sheriff or the policeman something, what he thought about them, and went back to an updated version of Chaucerian lan­guage, I believe it was.
Judge BORK. I do not know , Senator LEAHY. Fortunately, a well-read sheriff who recognized exactly what he meant.
Judge BORK. That Chaucerian English is—I do not know what I think about that case. I am less willing to say that obscenity in public is as protected as advocacy of something in private.
Senator LEAHY. I do not mean to mix things up with Hess. I would rather stick with Brandenburg because I had understood your view of Brandenburg differently than the way you had ex­pressed it today.
Judge BORK. Well, I have had a different view of it from time to time, but I had a view as broad as Brandenburg before I wrote this article, when I was still teaching that course in constitutional theory with Bickel, I had an enormously broad view of the amend­ment.
Senator LEAHY. SO is it safe to say then that there has been a metamorphosis of your views from 1971?
Judge BORK. Oh, yes. My views have evolved and changed. A gen­tleman named Scott called me this morning from a suburb of Chi­cago and wanted to give me this and I think since I have been trying to say this and I cannot say it as well as this quotation, I would like to read it to you. It is what Benjamin Franklin said when he voted in the convention for the Constitution, 200 years ago tomorrow.
He said, Mr. President, I confess there are several parts of this Constitution which I do not, at present, approve, but I am not sure that I shall never approve them for having lived long, I have experienced many instances of being obliged by better in­formation or fuller consideration to change opinions, even on important subjects which I once thought right, but found to be otherwise. It is therefore that the older I grow, the more apt I am to doubt my own judgment and to pay more respect to the judgment of others.
I have been trying to say that for 2 days now, Senator, but this gentleman from Chicago called me and gave me that quotation. I think that says it.
Senator LEAHY. Then, in 1979, when you gave a speech at the University of Michigan on "The Individual, the State and the first amendment," you said again that political speech is at the core of first amendment protection. You said that any version of the first amendment not built on the political speech core and confined by, if not to it, will either prove intellectually incoherent or leave judges free to legislate as they will, both mortal sins and the law.
Judge BORK. Senator, may I have a page citation of that? Senator LEAHY. Page 9 of the—the quote came from page 9 of the University of Michigan speech.
Judge BORK. Well, I think that is right and I think that is a fairly conventional view. I said the political core will, in some sense, confine the first amendment's protections, but it will not be confined to politics. That is right. I think that is the way Alexan­der Meiklejohn looked at it. I think it is the way that Harry Kalven looked at it. I think it is the way that Alexander Bickel looked at it. Political speech is the paradigm case. Other kinds of speech inform our society and make it freer and make it better able to be efficient and govern itself, and they are all protected.
But, when you get to something, for example, to take the outer case, when you get to pornography, it is a little hard to see what that has to do with any connection with the way this society lives and governs itself.
Senator LEAHY. I am not talking about pornography. There are an awful lot of cases that do not fall, as we both agree, do not fall in either the political area or the pornographic area. My last ques­tion, if I am correct, you said that back in 1979, you felt Branden­burg was fundamentally wrong but today you feel it is right?
Judge BORK. Yes. I think that what I thought was wrong with Brandenburg then was that it did not take sufficient account of the dangers of not one speaker, but many speakers passing the same message of violent overthrow or violence, no one speech of which would produce violence or violent overthrow, but taken together, might produce a very dangerous situation. I now think that this society is not susceptible to that, even in its worst days, and I also
think that the first amendment says we will take that chance. Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, just so you
know when we go on the second go-around, I will want to re-visit
this area. I have a number of questions in the area of the first
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. Senator Specter. Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, I had
intended to move right into the issue of liberties and freedoms, due
process and equal protection, but I am a little surprised by some of
your responses to Senator Leahy so I will pick up there. When he
asked you about the 1971 Indiana Law Review article, which has
been a pillar of the law attributable to you, you said, as I wrote it
down that you have moved to where the Supreme Court currently
is. If that is so, I think these confirmation hearings may be very
brief indeed. Is it really so that you have moved to "where the Supreme Court currently is"? Judge BORK. On first amendment law. The important part of
that article, from my point of view, is the first half, which argues
that judges must stick to intention, what the framers intended. The
second half is an attempt to apply the idea of neutral principles in
a rather cosmic and artificial fashion to some first amendment
problems. On the first amendment, I am now—you may give me a
case, Senator, that I do not agree with. I have not been following it
that closely. But as I understand the Supreme Court's current position on
things like advocacy of civil disobedience and so forth and so on,
yes. Now, on the question of things like obscenity, the Supreme
Court seems to have two positions. One is the one expressed in
Cohen v. California in which an obscenity was on the back of a
jacket a young man wore into the courthouse and the other one is
in the—and the Supreme Court said that that was protected by the
first amendment. The other was in the Pacifica case, where a comedian was saying
the ten forbidden words, as he called them, over the air, on a radio
station and the Supreme Court allowed the Federal Communications Commission to take away the license or somehow punish the
station. So, in the obscenity area, they seem to have two positions.
I am not sure which is the one. But on the subject of speaking, advocating political disobedience or civil disobedience or advocating
overthrow, I am about where the Supreme Court is. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, let's come back to the 1971 article
which most of us have assumed that was where you were. You
were quoted in an interview in 1985, October, in "Conservative
Digest" saying that "I finally worked out a philosophy which is expressed in the 1971 Indiana Law Review." Judge BORK. DO you have an extra copy of that, Senator? Senator SPECTER. I have my copy. The specific quotation is, "I finally worked out a philosophy which is expressed pretty much in
the 1971 Indiana Law Journal piece, neutral principles and some
First Amendment problems."
Judge BORK. Yes, I think that is right. The explicitly political
speech business is a small part of that article and I think—was this
1985?
Senator SPECTER. In 1985, October of 1985. Judge BORK. Well, as Senator Leahy just pointed out, by 1982, I
had written to the ABA Journal disavowing that position, so as far
as speech is concerned, I was not sticking to that position. Senator SPECTER. Well, that is not quite the way I read it, Judge
Bork. In the 1982 article, you take exception to limited questions of
moral and scientific debate as being central to democratic government. Judge BORK. Senator, where is this? Senator SPECTER. NOW, I am referring to the article Judge BORK. What page is this? Senator SPECTER. There is only one page. It is the one you referred to this morning. It is in the American Bar Association Journal. Judge BORK. Oh, I am sorry. I have the wrong one. I have the
"Conservative Digest" here. Senator SPECTER. Let's go back to the "Conservative Digest" if
you found that. The "Conservative Digest" says in October 1985, "I
finally worked out a philosophy which is expressed pretty much in
the 1971 Indiana Law Journal piece." That is less than two years
ago and the essential question is, is it right or wrong. Judge BORK. Well, Senator, may I ask? I do not have the page
number. This is several pages long. Senator SPECTER. Page 101. Left-hand column. While you are
taking a look at that, Judge Bork, could somebody pick up for you
"The District Lawyer" from May/June of 1985, where you say
pretty much the same thing? Judge BORK. Well, this, Senator, I think clearly was said with respect to my philosophy about judging in matters of the intention of
the lawmakers. I was not endorsing everything I had said in that
Indiana article, obviously, because in 1982, 3 years before that, I
had taken back the part about explicit political speech. This is my
basic philosophy of judging—the original intention philosophy that
I was saying, I have worked it out and pretty much expressed it
there. And that is true. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, in 1982, you made a comment that
was limited to moral and scientific debate, but let's go on to some
of the other points. Your views, as you expressed them, about the
Holmes doctrine on clear and present danger were not very equivocal. Judge BORK. Where is this. Senator. Senator SPECTER. This is in the University of Michigan speech,
which Senator Leahy had asked you about. And you talk about the
Holmes-Brandeis position and then you say this statement defies
explanation. There is a terrifying frivolity in the whole statement.
Judge BORK. May I have the page please? I have it, Senator. I
found it. It is page 20. Senator SPECTER. Page 20. Judge BORK. Well, I think the statement I just quoted does defy
explanation and I think there is about it a terrifying frivolity, a
point that I must say that Alex Bickel made as well about this
thing. Holmes said, about a case where a man was advocating the
violent overthrow of the Government, he gave as a reason for protecting that advocacy—now I have just said that Brandenburg would protect it and I do not mind that rationale, but what Holmes
said was that if in the long run, the beliefs expressed in proletarian
dictatorship are destined to be accepted by the dominant forces of
the community, the only meaning of free speech is that they should
be given their chance and have their way. In the first place, Senator, one wonders. One reason I think it
defies explanation is that the dominant forces of the community
have just passed the law he would hold unconstitutional. How can
he say that we must allow a proletarian dictatorship to have its
way but a law passed by a democratic majority cannot have its
way. It seems to me to defy explanation. Senator SPECTER. Well, Judge Bork, you can have it, it seems to
me, one way or the other. It can either be frivolous and defy explanation, but it cannot be right. Judge BORK. Cannot be what? Senator SPECTER. Cannot be both right and defy explanation and
be frivolous. Judge BORK. Right, did you say? Senator SPECTER. Well, you have said that you accept the Brandenburg v. Ohio and Hess v. Indiana decisions, which essentially
state the Holmes' clear and present danger doctrine. Judge BORK. I do not think I necessarily accepted Hess, but what
I was criticizing here is a statement by Holmes—his reasons, his
reasoning in the case. I found his dissent in that case not to be a
very coherent statement of a rationale. One could arrive, I think, at the Brandenburg decision, along the
lines I was discussing: we recognize the dangers of this kind of
speech but we will put up with a good deal of it rather than—we
will err on the side of putting up with it rather than err on the
side of suppressing it. But that does not mean that this statement
makes any sense. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I do not quite understand how the
Holmes rationale can make no sense, and you can accept the rationale, but let me move on for just a moment. Judge BORK. Senator, may I please try once more to explain that.
I do not accept the rationale. The rationale makes no sense. There
is a different rationale for Brandenburg than this. That is all I
meant. Senator SPECTER. AS to Brandenburg, you said Hess andBrandenburg are fundamentally wrong interpretations of the first amendment. I do not want to belabor it any longer, Judge Bork, but it
just seems surprising to me, that in the context where you characterize that doctrine as "fundamentally wrong" and attack the rationale as "frivolous," that you can, at the same time, say that you
now accept the current Supreme Court interpretation. Judge BORK. Senator, I do not attack the rationale ofBrandenburg as frivolous. I attack the rationale that Holmes gave in Gitlow
as frivolous, and I do not know that I would agree with Hess. I
would have to go back and look at that. I just think Brandenburg is
where the law has settled, it seems to be an acceptable place for
the law to settle, and I am not—I was engaged in a debate here
with the ACLU. I am not engaged in a debate any more. The law
 
has settled on Brandenburg. I think Brandenburg is fine. I am not
concerned about it.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I would like to come back to the
subject because I think the interpretation will be that if you take
Gitlow to Abrams, to DeJong, to the Smith Act prosecutions, and
Dennis, to Brandenburg and to Hess, that it is one doctrine, and we
can come back to it at a later time. But the doctrine that Holmes expresses I think is a very well established one, the essential part of which is that time has upset
many fighting faiths, and that these ideas ought to have full expression, until there reaches a time when there is an imminence of
violence. Your very extensive writings, on a number of occasions, have
taken fundamental issue with that. So I will want to retrace
through the philosophy, to see how you can come to that conclusion, because I think it is an important issue. Before moving on to equal protection and the liberties argument,
I just want to understand what your position is at the present time. In this 1984 ABA Journal article, you say that you continue to
think that obscenity and pornography do not fit the rationale for
protection, referring to the first amendment rationale. Have you
changed your view on that? Judge BORK. NO. I have not, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Well, would you disagree with Justice Rehnquist's opinion, who was Justice then, not Chief Justice, in Jenkins
v. Georgia, where he said that the first amendment prohibited
Georgia from convicting someone for showing the movie, "Carnal
Knowledge"?Judge BORK. Well, I do not know the movie, "Carnal Knowledge," and for all I know it may not be pornography. You know, I
think unfortunately for the Court—because some of them get quite
upset about it—when a community bans a particular item, movie,
book or magazine as being obscene or pornographic, the Court is
almost necessarily faced with a task of examining it to see whether
it falls within the allowable definition of those words. And for all I know, the court examined "Carnal Knowledge" and
decided it was not pornographic. Senator SPECTER. The question, Judge Bork, is, you have a Georgia statute on obscenity, you have a jury verdict, you have a conviction, you have it upheld by the State Supreme Court, and then you
have the U.S. Supreme Court, Justice Rehnquist saying first
amendment protection stops that prosecution. All of your writings say—and you affirm it here this afternoon—
that the first amendment does not reach pornography or obscenity
to stop majority rule in a State court determination. And I am
saying to you that that pretty clearly places you at variance, at
least on that issue, with Justice Rehnquist, or, I am asking you if it
does.
Judge BORK. With respect, Senator, I think it does not at all, because merely because a particular State defines something as pornographic does not mean that the Supreme Court has to accept
that definition.
In order to protect the first amendment, the Supreme Court has
to apply a definition of pornography of its own. Otherwise, the
States could define literary works, or even political speech as pornographic.
Senator SPECTER. Well, but you are then saying that it is appro­priate for the Supreme Court to strike down a conviction on first
amendment grounds where it is pornographic. Judge BORK. No, no, Senator. I am not making myself clear. I
will try to be clearer in what I say. The determination of what is
pornographic for first amendment purposes has to be made by the
Supreme Court, or by the lower federal courts. Otherwise, if you let a State's definition of what is pornographic
govern, things that are not pornographic, in a constitutional sense,
might be banned. So it is that the Supreme Court, when it looks at
"Carnal Knowledge," must be saying that this thing is not pornographic; it does not have those characteristics that would entitle a
State to ban it. I have not read the case. I am almost certain that must be what
they must be doing. Senator SPECTER. Of course it would have to say that because when it is obscenity, it is not within the first amendment, but if
the Supreme Court picks up a case where a State has entered a
conviction on pornographic grounds, and strikes it down as violative of the first amendment, as incorporated by the 14th amendment due process clause, then they are reaching that form of
speech on first amendment grounds. And you are saying that the first amendment does not reach that
kind of speech.Judge BORK. The first amendment does not reach pornography,
as pornography is defined by the Supreme Court. If a State says
something is pornographic and the Supreme Court disagrees, it
must strike down the conviction because it is not pornographic in a
constitutional sense, and I think that is entirely what is taking
place there. For example, if a State passed a statute saying that there was
imminent lawless action from a certain type of speech and convicted somebody of that, the Supreme Court would have to take a look
and determine whether or not that was a reasonable judgment
about imminent lawless action, because if it were not, the Supreme
Court would reverse. In all of these cases, I think the Supreme Court must make the
ultimate judgment about whether the State's categorization of the
speech as pornographic, or as dangerous, in the Brandenburg sense,
was a correct determination. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, if you are saying that, then you are saying that the majority, Madisonian majoritarianism which
you write about so extensively, does not apply in that situation.
That we are not allowing the legislature to make a definition, a
definition which a conviction is entered on, but that the Supreme
Court has the authority, legitimacy—your term—to come in and
upset that conviction. Judge BORK. Senator, with respect, that is entirely consistent with my position on what I have called the Madisonian dilemma,
and that is that the Supreme Court must, by applying the Constitution, define what things the majority may rule, and what things
the majority may not rule, where the individual, or the minority,
must be left freedom.
Now free speech is perhaps the most central freedom in the Constitution. That means that the Supreme Court, ultimately the Supreme Court, the Federal Judiciary, when it says pornography is
not protected, it must make sure that what the State calls pornography is pornography, and that is why they are entitled to examine
a State determination that "Carnal Knowledge" is pornography
and to reverse it. Senator SPECTER. That is done by applying the first amendment. Judge BORK. Yes, Senator. I agree, entirely. Senator SPECTER. But your writings are exactly to the contrary,
as recently as 1985. Judge BORK. Senator, I do not understand. I am missing some
aspect of this, because in 1985, I said the first amendment protection did not extend to pornography. All I am saying now is, that
the Supreme Court must decide what is pornography, and what is
not, in order to apply the first amendment protection. Senator SPECTER. And you are saying that they do apply the first
amendment protection. Judge BORK. Not to pornography. They have to define what Senator SPECTER. But they make a definition of whether the
speech is, or is not, pornography. Judge BORK. Right. Senator SPECTER. And they interfere with the determination
made by the State of Georgia. Judge BORK. They must do that. Senator SPECTER. But you have written that the Court does not
have legitimacy in using the first amendment to interfere with
what a State has done. Judge BORK. Senator, I never said that the first amendment—the
Court did not have a legitimate role, under the first amendment, to
interfere with what the State has done. Now, the State may say we
are regulating pornography, but it may be regulating things that
the Supreme Court does not think are pornography. Therefore, the
Supreme Court must make sure that it is pornography, before it
allows the State to ban it. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, with all due respect, I think you
are putting the rabbit in the hat. The Supreme Court has to take
the issue to decide what is involved. Now you have written, going
back to the Indiana Law Review article, "There is no basis for judicial intervention to protect that variety of expression we call obscene or pornographic." Now you cannot have a determination as to whether it is obscenity or pornographic until the Court takes it up, but you say, flatly
here, that there is no basis for judicial intervention.
Judge Bork, I think this is important because you have this
strain running through the equal protection clause, the due process
clause, through all of your writings.
What you are essentially challenging is any basis for judicial
intervention, and of course the Court has to make a determination
as to what the facts are, if they are to reach a conclusion. But the
issue which you have framed is whether the Court reaches that
question.
Judge BORK. May I have a page number there. Senator SPECTER. Page 20.
Judge BORK. All right. The Court must protect speech that the first amendment covers. It must not protect speech that the first amendment does not cover and which a community wishes to outlaw. A community's definition, or characterization of a particu­lar magazine, or book, or movie as "pornographic" cannot be taken as final.
The Supreme Court must have its own definition of what is por­nographic, and, indeed, it does, and then look at the book, or the speech, to see whether it is pornographic, and hence, subject to State regulation.
Senator SPECTER. But isn't it exactly the same, that the Supreme Court must make a determination as to what is equal protection of the law, and the Supreme Court must make a determination as to what is due process of law?
Judge BORK. That is right.
Senator SPECTER. And the thrust of your writings have been that the Court may not make those interpretations, absent some specific constitutional right. That it is really the same area of judicial action, and Supreme Court determination, Supreme Court legitima­cy.
Judge BORK. Senator, in the pornography case we are talking about, there is absolutely no problem, because the Supreme Court has the first amendment and its guarantee of free speech and free press to apply, and it must apply it.
So that there is no question of judicial legitimacy in the first amendment area. There is a constitutional provision which must be applied.
Senator SPECTER. But it all depends on whether the Court, legiti­mately, may apply the first amendment to pornography cases, and you have said that they should not.
Judge BORK. Well, and so has the Supreme Court said that, I be­lieve. But the whole thing I think we are discussing, Senator Spec­ter, is who determines whether or not this thing is pornography, and all I am saying is, that in order to serve the first amendment, the Supreme Court must determine that and not the local commu­nity.
Senator SPECTER. Well, I would say that the Supreme Court has to make that same determination in the due process area, or the equal protection area
Judge BORK. Yes. Senator SPECTER. Which, as I understand it, you say they do not have legitimacy in certain circumstances. But let me move on to the point that I had intended to start with.
You said yesterday, Judge Bork, that the professorial writings did not really involve damage, that nobody is hurt in a classroom, but people are hurt in a courtroom, and that is the point of depar­ture.
I would raise a question about the power of ideas, and the work of a thinker, and point to your own comments in the antitrust field where, as you point out, there was a new idea at the University of Chicago in the antitrust field. It was an idea of your mentor, heir and director, whom you have written about so extensively, and it became the law, as you have articulated it.
And I think that the ideas are very, very important. When you talk about equal protection—and your writings have focused on equal protection applicable only in a racial situation, and you have expanded that to ethnic groups—and you have expanded that even further in some of your testimony today—at least as I interpret it—to a reasonable standard test, and these are subjects which I want to explore with you at some length, and I only have a few minutes left, about 5 or 6 minutes left here today.
It seems to me, in reading the history of Plessy and Ferguson,and the adoption of the equal protection clause of the 14th amend­ment, and reading Raoul Berger, that there was no question that at the time the equal protection clause of the 14th amendment was adopted, that the framers, or ratifiers, did not intend, in the remo­test way, to cover desegregation. That they expected to have segre­gated schools.
There were many States which had segregation. Five border States, eight Northern States. The District of Columbia schools were segregated. The Senate gallery was segregated.
So that the interpretation which you have advanced, that "sepa­rate but equal," in the absence of equality through separation must lead to integration, seems to me to be at very sharp variance with what the framers had intended.
So that if you take a consistent interpretation, you cannot come to the result that the Supreme Court did in Brown v. Board of Education.
But even on more fundamental grounds, you could not come to the conclusion that the schools had to be integrated on due process grounds, and you have been very critical of the due process clause, saying that if there is not a specifically articulated right in the Constitution, you cannot derive it from due process.
But yet, the D.C. schools were desegregated. Where can you find in the Constitution, in the due process clause, authority for deseg­regation?
Judge BORK. I will answer that first, Senator, but I would like to go back to Brown and the equal protection clause, if you will, be­cause that seems to me to be important, too.
Senator SPECTER. Sure.
Judge BORK. Boiling v. Sharpe, I guess, was the companion case to Brown v. Board of Education, and the Supreme Court there faced a problem because the equal protection clause through which Brown moved to accomplish desegregation applies only to States and not to the federal government.
And you had, then, the problem of the District of Columbia, and the only available constitutional clause, they thought, was the due process clause, which does apply to the federal government.
I am told that was the first time, I think, in Boiling v. Sharpe,that anybody said that the due process clause contains an equal protection component like the equal protection clause.
Senator SPECTER. NO. They did not say that, Judge Bork.
Judge BORK. Didn't they?
Senator SPECTER. NO. In Boiling v. Sharpe, the decision was made on the ground that it was fundamentally unfair, an arbitrary dep­rivation of liberty in violation of the due process clause, not reverse incorporation.
Judge BORK. I know. They said the fifth amendment does not
contain an equal protection clause, but the concepts of equal protection and due process, both stemming from our American ideal of
fairness, are not mutually exclusive. And as a matter of fact, since
then—I guess the reason—since then, they are not mutually exclusive, and the equal-protection concept got into the due process
clause. And since then it is commonplace for the courts, or for advocates, to refer to the equal-protection component of the due process clause, which is what this is taken to have accomplished. Senator SPECTER. Well, I think the Court is perfectly clear here,
that they do not find an equal-protection obligation for the federal
government, and they put it on due process grounds and on fairness grounds.But the underlying question, Judge Bork, that seems to me to be
applicable here, is why does the Court come to that position? It
seems to me that it goes back to a statement you made yesterday
in response, I believe, to a question from Senator Thurmond, where
you said, referring to the commerce clause, that the appointment
power meant that sooner or later, the commerce clause would be
interpreted in accordance with the needs of the nation, which is a
very broad articulation of what the Supreme Court does, meeting
the needs of the nation. That certainly is not concrete and that certainly is not specified
in the Constitution Judge BORK. That is true. Senator SPECTER. At variance with what the Commerce clause says. And if you read the history of the equal protection clause and the due process clause, and the status of segregation, you find that it is very much opposed to integration. And yesterday when you were asked about which was the most
controversial case besides Griswold—I think Senator Hatch asked
you that—you picked Brown v. Board of Education. And that was
because Judge BORK. It was controversial. Senator SPECTER. It was a controversial case. You
said that even though cases are good, they are controversial. You
did say that?Judge BORK. Even though I think legally they are clear, I meant
politically controversial.Senator SPECTER. Well, that was the question. You said it was
controversial. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator SPECTER. And I think it was that controversial because
there was no legal underpinning for it. Judge BORK. Senator, I think there was, and let me say two
things about it. One is that I have recently been told—I have never
read the briefs in the Supreme Court but I know some folks who
have in Brown—and it begins to look as if there is historical argument that the framers of the 14th amendment did not like segregation and may have intended to do away with it, but that—and the
black codes and the segregation did not begin to come into the
South until the troops left the South, the Northern troops left the
South. And later the Supreme Court changed. Plessy v. Ferguson,
after all, is a 1896 case, which is fairly long after the 14th amendment, Plessy v. Ferguson being the case that said separate but equal is all right.
But passing that, passing that historical evidence, which I think casts some doubt on the flat assumption that the 14th amendment really meant separate but equal, let me say this. They wrote a clause that does not say anything about separation. They wrote a clause that says "equal protection of the laws".
I think it may well be true, as you suggest, Senator, that they had an assumption which they did not enact, but they had an as­sumption that equality could be achieved with separation. Over the years it became clear that that assumption would not be borne out in reality ever. Separation would never produce equality.
I think when the background assumption proved false, it was en­tirely proper for the court to say "we will carry out the rule they wrote" and if they would have been a little surprised that it worked out this way, that is too bad. That is the rule they wrote and they assumed something that is not true.
And in that way I do not think any damage is done—you can even look at it more severely. You could say suppose they had writ­ten a clause that said "we want equality and that can be achieved by separation and we want that too."
By 1954 it was perfectly apparent that you could not have both equality and separation. Now the court has to violate one aspect or the other of that clause, as I have framed it hypothetically. It seems to me that the way the actual amendment was written, it was natural to choose the equality segment, and the court did so. I think it was proper constitutional law, and I think we are all better off for it.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I think we are better off for it too, but I do not think that that is a logical conclusion if you are look­ing at the framers' intent. But if you turn to due process and take your application of due process of law and what you have said about Griswold and Roe v. Wade, how can you justify Boiling v. Sharpe applying the due process clause to stopping segregation?
Judge BORK. 1 do not know that anybody ever has. I think that has been a case that has left people puzzled, and I have been told that some Justices on the Supreme Court felt very queasy after­wards about Boiling v. Sharpe.
Senator SPECTER. If you take Raoul Berger's analysis they felt very queasy about Brown v. Board of Education and Boiling v. Sharpe because they came to a decision, essentially as you said it yesterday, in accordance with the needs of the Nation.
My time is up, but what I want to come back to is how that ap­plies in other contexts, how that applies in privacy, how that ap­plies in equal protection. And if you are willing, as a Supreme Court nominee, to say that you sanction Brown v. Board of Educa­tion, and you sanctioned Boiling v. Sharpe on due process grounds, then it seems to me you are a significant distance from original intent.
Judge BORK. I do not think I am on Brown v. Board of Educa­tion. Senator SPECTER. HOW about Boiling v. Sharpe?
Judge BORK. I think there may be a significant difference there, and I did not say I sanctioned it. I think that constitutionally that is a troublesome case.
Now it has been suggested that if the Supreme Court had struck down segregation in all of the States under the equal protection clause, Congress most certainly would have stopped segregation in the District of Columbia. And it would have been a national scan­dal if they had not.
Boiling v. Sharpe seems to have been propelled by a feeling that if we are going to do this to all of the States, we cannot let the federal government do it. I understand that feeling.
Senator SPECTER. But as a matter of principle and as a matter of exponent as you are of neutral principles, if you can apply the due process clause as they did in Boiling v. Sharpe, why not in Gris­wold v. Connecticut?
Judge BORK. Well, if they apply the due process clause that way, Senator, I quite agree with you. Why not in Griswold v. Connecti­cut, and why not in all kinds of cases? You are off and running with substantive due process which I have long thought is a perni­cious constitutional idea.
Senator SPECTER. I think it is as you articulate it, but if you start to deal with the needs of the nation and you accept in Boiling v. Sharpe to strike down segregation in the District of Columbia, and you accept it in the commerce clause, what happens to your principle?
Judge BORK. Senator, I did not accept it in Boiling v. Sharpe.And when I say I accepted it in the commerce clause, I accept it because what has happened is irreversible. There is simply no point in a judge running around trying to tear down the federal government in the code book and all the institutions build up, and you do it by a principle of stare decisis. That is all you can do, a principle of following precedent so that we do not try to tear up the Nation in a vain attempt to take the commerce clause back to where it was in 1790.
Senator SPECTER. Final question: Do you accept Boiling v. Sharpe or not? Judge BORK. I have not thought of a rationale for it because I think you are quite right, Senator.
Senator LEAHY. YOU say you have or have not?
Judge BORK. Have not. I think you are quite right, Senator, be­cause if you say it is due process and we will do whatever is fair or good under due process, the court's powers are unlimited. That is the problem I have with that substantive due process.
Senator SPECTER. Well, I know that you will not reverse Boiling
v. Sharpe in any event, but it is a very uneasy conclusion, Judge Bork, when you talk about the needs of the Nation. And when my next round is up, you get into the concepts of rooted in the con­science of the people and you get into Holmes, who was very much against substantive due process but talked about striking laws on which reasonable men could not differ, and you see the application of Alexander Bickel to these doctrines and his articulation of insu­lation and leisure, and where the courts have been and what the tradition of this country is, and I think that what so many of us are looking for here is some reassurance that you would follow in
that tradition. That is what I am looking for. Judge BORK. All right. I think Senator SPECTER. I am concerned about where you are going to
be. If you are going to accept the Supreme Court where it is today,
whether I like it all or not, fine. But if you are going to make
sharp variations from it, then we have got to pursue quite a
number of questions because I think your answers to Senator
Leahy raise a number of issues, at least, that I want to pursue. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Before we go to the next questioner, I had indicated earlier that about every hour-and-a-half we would give an opportunity to break for 5 minutes. Although we have only gotten
through two questioners, I suggest we take a 5-minute recess, and
then we will begin with Senator Heflin. Judge BORK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might have 20 seconds
to supplement my discussion with Senator Specter? The CHAIRMAN. Take as much time as you like, Judge. Judge BORK. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. IS Senator Specter here though? Maybe if you
are going to supplement Senator Specter, we should have him in
the room. Judge BORK. Well, why don't I wait until he comes back. The CHAIRMAN. I think he is just outside the room. Judge BORK. All right. Thank you.
 Judge BORK. The Senator is here now. The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Please proceed, Judge. Judge BORK. Senator Specter, I just asked for a moment to supplementThe CHAIRMAN. We will have order in the hearing room please. Judge BORK. Supplement one answer to you and
that is this: I want to make it clear, absolutely clear if I can, that
my doubts about the substantive due process approach to Boiling—
and I really think that Boiling said that the equal protection component exists in the—we can go back to that. My doubts about the
substantive due process of Boiling v. Sharpe does not mean that I
would ever dream of overruling Boiling v. Sharpe, as you
suggested. And furthermore I should make it clear, as I have said repeatedly, segregation is not only unlawful but immoral. And I do not
want my doubts about a constitutional mode of reasoning to be
turned into anything other than that, not by you, Senator. I mean
just by people who are listening to us. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I appreciate your comment and we can pick it up later as to issues which are awful and immoral, but perhaps the court ought to reach again. Judge BORK. I suspect we will pick that up again, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much for the addition. The CHAIRMAN. IS there anything else you would like to say? Judge BORK. NO, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Heflin from Alabama.
Senator HEFLIN. Judge Bork, I have given considerable thought
to why the furor and we have a furor. I suppose that probably this
is—your confirmation is one of the hottest issues that has been
around in a long time. I suppose like a gas burner, there are a lot
of flames, but the most intense flame, it seems to me, is Roe v.
Wade.
Now you have been asked some questions about it. I do not think
there is any question that the pro-life people who fervently and vehemently support you think that you will reverse it or at least some part of the court will reverse it.
The pro-choice people just as vehemently and fervently believe that you will also. There are those that probably would say if the
President did not think that you would reverse that case or join
the majority to reverse that case, that he would not have appointed
you. You can go on down with various speculations. I do not think there is much question that this is a major issue.
There are those that contend that the pro-choice people have ba­sically generated a heat among the civil rights coalition and that
the civil rights coalition are mistakenly equating abortion rights
with civil rights. Whether that would be true, I do not know. I do not know but it remains to be seen.
There is no question that the spotlight is on this issue and it is an issue that I think deserves clarification and directness on your part.
You answered the question about Roe v. Wade and what you would do. I believe that Senator Hatch, and maybe someone else,
asked you questions about it. But, as I recall and looking at the
record, you had basically three questions that you said you would
ask a lawyer. I do not know whether you said asking a lawyer is an invasion on your part or not. If not, then we can clarify that.
Basically, you had indicated that you would ask the lawyer first to see if he could find a right of privacy ought to be found in any
one of the specific amendments, but in some principal fashion from the Constitution.
So I want to know not only where you got it but what it covers. So I suppose that that question would be: Where do you find in the Constitution a general right of privacy?
And second, you said that if you would tell that lawyer that if you cannot find a general right of privacy, can you derive a right
to an abortion or at least to a limitation upon anti-abortion from the Constitution.
You said that you would—if after listening to the arguments and to those two questions that you would raise, then if did not sound
like it was going to be a viable theory, which would be directed to
those two, then you would say you would like for him to argue
whether it is a kind of case which should not be overruled, which is basically stare decisis.
Now on the general right of privacy—well, first, let me quote what you have been quoted and this comes from magazines and
some of your writings—if it is incorrect, then correct me—Roe v.
Wade is in itself an unconstitutional decision, a serious and wholly-
unjustifiable usurpation of eight legislative authorities. Is that a
correct recital of a statement you have made?
Judge BORK. I made that statement, yes.
Senator HEFLIN. All right, sir.
Now we go back to the general right of privacy, upon which Roe
v. Wade is based coming out of Griswold, and you had two, one Justice Goldberg out of the ninth amendment and the other one from
Justice Douglas which is called the penumbra, which is sort of a
vague term, but I understand that is something to do with astronomy and various shadows and unclear things, but it comes from the
specific mentioning of rights of privacy, as you have enumerated to
me in various other amendments.
Now you in your studying it and making a statement like that,
do you really believe that you can find anywhere a general right of
privacy that you would accept from the Constitution?
Judge BORK. I do not know, Senator. I certainly would not accept emanations and penumbras analysis, which is I think less an analysis than a metaphor. And the ninth amendment part gives me difficulty because it is a little hard to know what category of rights, if
any, were, supposed to be preserved by the ninth amendment unless
it is the State constitutional rights. But there may be some way to do it. I have heard fairly strong
moral arguments for abortion, just as I have hard fairly strong
moral arguments against it. Whether those moral arguments could
be rooted to the constitutional material, I really do not know.
What I do unfortunately, I suppose, is take Supreme Court opinions that seem to me unsatisfactory as matters of constitutional
reasoning and criticize them. And I have not gone back into the
history and other things in an attempt to construct a new Senator THURMOND. Judge, keep your voice up so we can hear you.Judge BORK. All right, Senator—a new right of privacy that has
some other meaning. Maybe, as I say, one of the moral arguments
would apply perhaps only to abortion because Griswold and Roe
are quite different cases in quite different situations, and I do not
know if you want me to rehearse some of the moral argumentation
I have heard or not, but I do not know—I have not heard anybody
yet root it in the Constitution. Senator HEFLIN. But I am correct in assuming that as of now at
this hearing that you know of no theory which could be derived
from the Constitution which would grant a general right of privacy.
Judge BORK. Well, certainly not a general right of privacy that is
as free-floating as the one we have now because we do not even
know what it covers. Privacy to do what? But it is true, Senator, I
do not know, I do not have available a constitutional theory which
would support a general defined right. But that does not mean that
there is not one, and it seems to me I often am surprised to learn
that there is an argument in a certain direction that I had not anticipated and I have not tried to anticipate one here. And I can only say that if somebody has a constitutional theory,
I will listen to it attentively. Senator HEFLIN. Am I correct in saying that you do not expect to
seek it and try to find it yourself?
Judge BORK. Well, if a case came before me I would, but, no, now
I am in the business of hearing and deciding cases, and I really do
not have time to go off and anticipate a question that may or may
not ever come before me. But if a case comes before me—sometimes lawyers' arguments give you ideas that the lawyer has not
expressed—I would send my clerks out and try to research that. Senator HEFLIN. All right, now to the second one. If you cannot
derive a general right of privacy, can you derive a right to an abortion which is "a" of two and you have "b", which is, can you derive
a right to abortion from the Constitution, that is, obviously, that
specifically gives somebody a right of privacy? So, we just dismiss—
I mean, that I do not think is in the language there that could be
construed that says you have a specific, implicit, explicit right to
an abortion, in the Constitution. All right, your "b" part of that is, at least which would provide a
limitation upon anti-abortion statutes legitimately from the Constitution. What do you, at this time, see as a possibility of a limitation? Judge BORK. Well, it would seem to me, Senator, that it would be
easier to argue a right to an abortion. I am not saying it would
work, but it would be easier to do that than it would be to find this
generalized right of privacy. For example, I understand groups are
working—I have not seen their work product, but I am told that
groups are working on that. For example, some groups, I think, are
trying an equal protection argument. Only women have this specific burden and forcing a woman to
carry a baby to term—some of the groups are arguing, I suppose, is
a form of gender discrimination. I have not seen that argument
worked out, but I know it is being worked on. Senator HEFLIN. Well, that would be basically difficult from the
language of the Constitution, since mostly parts of the Constitution
is a conferring power on the federal government with a reservation
to the States and to the people for the power that is not specifically
granted to the federal government, under the 10th amendment. Judge BORK. I was referring more to the equal protection clause
of the 14th amendment, as the place in which that argument would
be rooted. I do not suggest it would succeed. I do not suggest it
would not. You asked me if one could begin to talk about where
one might root such an argument, and I think the right to an abortion—you might attempt to root it there, successfully or not, I do
not pretend to guess, but it is easier than a general right of privacy. Senator HEFLIN. Well, that would go basically contrary to some
of your feelings on the 14th amendment, extending in that area,
would it not? Judge BORK. In the area of women? Senator HEFLIN. Well, in the area of trying to give it as to a particular right of a limitation upon the States to pass certain laws,
which would, in effect, limit the anti-abortion statutes. Judge BORK. Well, I do not mean, Senator, to try to offer anybody some hope or something that I would find that constitutional
right. I am just saying that that is one area in which the argument
might take place. And I do not think it is entirely contrary to my
constitutional philosophy because I have been saying, this morning,
that the equal protection clause applies to women as well as to
men—obviously, because it would be ridiculous to say it applies
only to men—and that for over 90 years, the Supreme Court has
been using this question of is this a reasonable, fair classification.
I would suppose that is where the argument would be built,
might be built. But, I can go no further than that. I have not seen
the argument. It is not doctrinally absolutely impossible, but I cannot go any further than that.
Senator HEFLIN. All right, so now the third is the stare decisis, which would argue that this is the kind of case that should not be
overruled. Do you have any thoughts pertaining to how you would approach the issue of Roe versus Wade from a stare decisis basis?
Judge BORK. Senator, I do not want to get too close to the actual case, but Senator THURMOND. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me he is bordering now on a question asking him to express an opinion on a
matter that may come before the Supreme Court and I would think that would be improper.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, that is for the Judge to decide, what he thinks he can and cannot answer. Judge, how do you wish to answer that question?
Judge BORK. Well, I was beginning to say, Mr. Chairman, to Sen­ator Heflin, that I do not want to discuss stare decisis in the specific context of Roe v. Wade because that is getting awfully close to
how do the factors apply there and therefore, how would you
decide. But I will be glad to discuss my general approach to stare
decisis and the kinds of factors I would consider. I do not think I
can discuss how they might apply in this instance, because that
would be too close to committing myself to a particular vote later. If that is satisfactory to you, I will be glad to.
Senator HEFLIN. Yes, go ahead.
Judge BORK. All right. I think it has to be, in the first place, clear that the prior decision was erroneous. I mean, not just shaky
but really wrong in terms of constitutional theory, constitutional
principle. But that is not sufficient to overrule. I have discussed
these factors before, but I will mention them again, and a number
of factors counsel against overruling. For example, the development of private expectations on the part of the citizenry. Is this an
internalized belief and a right? The growth of institutions, govern­mental institutions, private institutions around a ruling.
Now, I have given two examples of that. One was the commerce clause and one was the free press clause, in both of which cases
many institutions have grown up in dependence upon that and
they have become part of the fabric of our national life. The need
for continuity and stability in the law, which is certainly always a
factor to be weighed. The need for predictability in legal doctrine. I
think the preservation of confidence in the Court by not saying
that this crowd just does whatever they feel like as the personnel
changes. And the respect due to the judgment of predecessors on a legal issue, if they have explained their judgment.
Now, of course, against that is—if it is wrong, and secondly, whether it is a dynamic force so that it continues to produce wrong
and unfortunate decisions. I think that was one of the reasons the
court in Erie Railroad v. Tompkins overruled Swift v. Tyson—a degenerative force, I think what Brandeis or somebody maybe called
dynamic potential. That is the kind of thing you would have to
weigh and that is a very fact-based consideration, a very particularistic consideration about whether this is the kind of case that goes one way or the other. I think the Court has got to work out a better theory of stare decisis than it has now articulated.
Senator HEFLIN. Well, is it fair to say that number one, that you think that the reasoning that brought about the decision of Roe v.
Wade is wrong? That the decision, based on that reasoning, was
wrong? And that unless some general right of privacy is shown to
you to come from the Constitution or unless you can find, in the
14th amendment or somewhere else, some limitation on anti-abortion statutes, then basically you would have to, under your thinking, look to the area of stare decisis in determining whether or not you think Roe v. Wade ought to be reversed?
Judge BORK. That is correct, Senator. I would have to ask myself what the presumption in favor of preserving a prior precedent meant in this case and whether it was overcome by other factors.
Senator HEFLIN. Another question and a line of questions. We have had, from your writings, some of which you have recanted,
others which you have not, that if—when I look at those, I can
come to conclusions depending on the result that I or somebody
else may want to reach on this matter. So, in trying to be fair to you, we ought to basically look at the overall total man.
On one hand, we have those that, in effect, contend that you are a right-wing extremist, who has, in the back lobes of his mind, a
radical right-wing agenda that if you get on the Court, you want to
put that agenda into place. On the other hand, there are those that
say you are a highly intellectual individual and that you have been
an evolving individual who has great intellectual curiosity who
wishes to explore different, unconventional concepts and theories and experience the unusual.
From reading your history and background as reported in news­papers, publications and all sorts of things, I think that we could
say that there have been unusual things. One interpretation is that
you have great intellectual curiosity. I have gone back and looked
at some of the things from your youth and have seen how you have
either involved or, on the other hand, that you have displayed a background of being a zealot at times.
For example, in your early youth, they list you as being a social­ist, that you stated that socialism sounded like a swell idea and rebellion also sounded like a swell idea, at one time. Then, there are
writings in some of the papers to the effect that you succeeded in
getting a young friend of yours to attend a Communist party meeting. That you were a champion boxer. You were also the president
of your class and editor of the school paper. And yet you went into
the Marine Corps and I assume—did you volunteer going into the Marine Corps?
Judge BORK. Oh, yes, you had to.
Senator HEFLIN. That is what I recall because since I am a Marine, too, my recollection of history might be a little bit different, but in World War II, as I recall, everyone that ever went into
the Marine Corps was a volunteer. And then, after you came out of
the Marine Corps—well, you have an interesting career in the
Marine Corps. You were a Japanese language translator, as I un­derstand it.
Judge BORK. Well, they started me in Japanese language school but then they dropped the bomb and they did not need Japanese
language specialists any more. So instead, they sent me to China
with a rifle to guard Chiang Kai-Shek's supply lines. It did not do
them much good, but that is what we did. Senator LEAHY. That is not your fault. Senator HEFLIN. Then you came back and you went to the University of Chicago and, according to some of their reports, you were
a liberal democrat. Then you went back into the Korean conflict in
the Marines. According to some, you liked the discipline of the
Marine Corps, the esprit de corps. Then you came back and I am
not exactly sure, but after coming out of the Marine Corps, as I understand it, the second time, there was some instance in which you
still exhibited maybe some socialistic leanings. Judge BORK. I would not say socialistic. No, I think I was a liberal at that point. That was my period of support for Adlai Stevenson. Senator HEFLIN. All right. Then after that, you, of course, I believe went to law school. You had the professor director, you got
under the free market theory, and then after graduating, you started to work with a large law firm. And then, as a member of that
law firm, took a position contrary to some of the policies of the law
firm before, that the law firm ought to recruit Jewish lawyers. Judge BORK. They had a quota. Senator HEFLIN. And you endeavored to try to bring about the
integration, in your law firm, of more Jewish members. Judge BORK. Yes, it should be said about that firm, they had—
well, it was not a rigid numerical quota, but they had, in effect, a
quota and a young man came and applied—I was quite close to a
couple of the senior partners and they said they did not want to
take him because he was Jewish. That resulted in a considerable
argument by me with them. He was a smashing success. Senator HEFLIN. YOU left the law firm in 1962 where you were
making a salary of around $40,000 to become a professor at less
than $15,000. Judge BORK. I don't think the disparity was that great, Senator. I
would like to make it that dramatic, but the fact is I think I was
making around $25,000 or $26,000 and I went to $16,000. The real
disparity was in the years that followed because it was going up
rapidly at the law firm and it was not going up rapidly at Yale. Senator HEFLIN. Well, that makes me think that you were not a
professorial zealot at that time wanting to get to be an academic
and that sort of thing. In other words, if the salary—if you had
been making $100,000, according to the free market concept it
would have been difficult to leave. Judge BORK. Oh, no. No, no, Senator. When I decided to leave the
firm it was dissatisfaction with the life I was leading. I mean, it
was a good practice, but I didn't want to do it for the next 40 years.
And one of the senior partners came to me and said, "You know,
we haven't spread the money around enough," and he mentioned a
number. And I said, "No matter what number you mention I'm
going."I liked the firm but I didn't want to lead that life. I wanted to be
an academic.
Senator HEFLIN. HOW long did you have that desire to be an academic? When do you think it generated
Judge BORK. Oh, about—well, it came to me on and off. You
mentioned my experience in the—I liked the Marine Corps, and
when I was at the university I used to say that my ambition in life
was to end up as a brigadier general in the Marine Corps Reserve
and a full professor. But that faded away. When I began to practice
law, I liked the practice so much for about 5 or 6 years that I
thought I would never—I thought I would just drop the professor idea. Then it came back to me.
I wanted to work on theories of the law and I really couldn't do that in the firm, and that is why I went off. I now wish I hadn't worked on theories in the law, but I did.
Senator HEFLJN. Well, now there are those, and this is not my idea, that say, well, you can look at his attire and the way he
wears his hair as some indication. I don't agree with that. I have
got several members in my staff that have beards and everything
else. Would you like to give us an explanation relative to the beard?
Judge BORK. Yes, I would. It is a very unromantic—it is a very unromantic explanation. In 1968-69 academic year I was on sabbatical leave in England with my family. I was writing a book. It was
an antitrust book, and you may ask why I chose to write it in England. The answer is the alternative was to write it in New Haven. 
And I—we went on a canal boat trip. You drive it yourself along the canal, and the family was in there. And the bathroom, the sink
was right against the wall, so when you tried to shave, unless you
shaved with your left hand, I couldn't do it. And for about a week I
didn't shave, and by that time my children had become fascinated
with what was then the beginnings of a red beard and they asked me to let it go. So I did.
I grew a—I liked it much better when it was red, Senator. And I let it grow, and it kind of intrigued me and intrigued my children,
and I have had it ever since.
Senator HEFLIN. There is nothing wrong with it. I would certain­ly clear that because there are a lot of bearded voters out there and I don't want to make hair of them. 
You know, we got some in Alabama, so I don't—you know, you have had a varied career. You had a lot of things. Some of your
writings are extreme. Some of them you have recanted. Some of
your activities, you have gone through a lot of changing ideas. And
really, it comes down to I wish I was a psychiatrist, rather than a
lawyer and a member of this committee, to try to figure out what you would do if you got on the Supreme Court.
Judge BORK. I think, Senator, the best guide to that is what I have done in any position of responsibility when I wasn't speculating. As a partner in a law firm, I was a very regular lawyer, nothing wild about it. As Solicitor General, I carried out my duties in
not a speculative or extreme fashion at all. And as a judge on the
Court of Appeals, I think I have not been extreme in any way.
And I don't think I have said much extreme in my life. You
know, Mr. Cutler had an article in this morning's paper, which I
think was put in the record, showing that my positions on these
various cases are shared by a lot of what nobody can doubt are
mainstream Justices and professors.
Now I did make the remark about explicitly political speech. It
was not a good idea. I have abandoned it. I prefer "abandoned" or
"evolved out of to the word "recanted," which sounds a little like
something else. And a few other things I have grown out of, but a
lot of the stuff I still believe. Senator HEFLIN. Well, now there are those that raise the issue
that your changing of your position and sort of renouncing your positions on certain positions came only at a time when a carrot was,
in effect, being dangled before your eyes; and, in effect, you—and,
in effect, that you changed your mind on certain writings when
you knew that you would have to come up and face questioning
before a Senate panel on confirmation on Solicitor General. Again,
also when you came up for the U.S. Court of Appeals. Judge BORK. Let me say this, Senator. You have recant—you
have—not recanted, recounted a series of my positions, political positions, ranging from my socialism in my youth to my liberal positions to my more conservative positions. None of those changes
took place in connection with any confirmation hearing and if
you—not one of them took place in connection with any carrot. And let me just point to a change in my legal philosophy which
is the most dramatic change in my writing, and that is, from December 1968 when I wrote the Fortune article called "The Supreme
Court Needs A New Philosophy," accepting the idea of Griswold v.
Connecticut as a reasonable—not the penumbras and emanations,
but the idea of reasoning from different provisions to a more general right, to 1971 when I took it all back, I was offered nothing in
there. Nothing was in prospect. There was no reason for me to
change my mind except that I changed my mind. Senator HEFLIN. Well, they say that publicly that you have
changed your mind. In effect, at the hearing or shortly before the
hearings pertaining to the Solicitor General appointment and the
appeals judge appointment. Judge BORK. Well, the change from 1968 in Fortune to 1971 in
Indiana, which was a dramatic change, there was no carrot or confirmation hearing or anything else anywhere in sight. And the
change in my political positions from my youth to today never had
anything to do with a confirmation hearing or a carrot or anything
else. Now it is easy to always say, well, it's—you know, on the one
hand, this fellow is rigid, and if he displays signs of evolving that
must be opportunistic. I can give you examples of changes, as I just
have, that had nothing to do with a carrot or a reward, but that is
as much as I can do. I can assure you that that is not the way I
operate, never have. The CHAIRMAN. Senator? Senator HEFLIN. My time is up. All right. The CHAIRMAN. Judge, anything else you would like to add? Judge BORK. NO thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Humphrey? Senator HUMPHREY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When you are
way down at the end of the table, as I am, and my colleague, Senator Simon, you think your turn will never come. It is like the 15year-old boy who can't wait to turn 16 so he can get his driver's
license. That last year seems interminable.
Judge Bork, my colleague from Wyoming, Senator Simpson, was certainly on target when he said he thought Senators would be unable, and others would be unable to resist the temptation to pick at the old scab of Watergate. And, indeed, that scab has been picked at in this room again, that very old scab, and I only want to come to it for just a moment. Since it has already been picked at, I hope to shed a little more light on that. So let me ask you a couple questions about the role you played in the firing of Archibald Cox.
You said earlier that at the time you discharged Cox you had the understanding from Eliot Richardson, the Attorney General, who had been to the White House with President Nixon, that the Presi­dent was determined at all costs to fire Archibald Cox. Am I right in that?
Judge BORK. That is correct, Senator.
Senator HUMPHREY. In fact, Eliot Richardson said, 3 days later at press conference, that he found the President "absolutely firm" about firing Cox. And therefore my question is, in your opinion, was the President going to fire Archibald Cox no matter what you did?
Judge BORK. Of course. Of course. He had—I didn't see the Presi­dent that night, Saturday, October 20th, until after I had signed the order discharging Cox. I had been discussing the matter with General—then General Haig. But when I saw the President, he was as gloomy and distraught a man as I have ever seen. He had not wanted to pay the price of losing his Attorney General and his Deputy Attorney General, and I think he would—he was now in a position where he would pay the price of losing his Solicitor Gener­al—certainly that wouldn't have bothered him—in order to fire Cox. That was quite clear.
Senator HUMPHREY. And if you had refused to fire Cox, what would have happened?
Judge BORK. Well, it seems to me there was nobody—according to the regulation in force at the Department of Justice, the succes­sion regulation, I was the third and last person on that regulation. So there was nobody behind me, by regulation, to step into my shoes. That means the President would have had a free hand in ap­pointing an acting Attorney General.
I suppose he would have learned, if I had resigned—he would have known and he quickly would have learned, since I was the first person without a promise to the Senate or other commitment, the others would not have done it either, if I had resigned. I don't think he would have even bothered to ask them.
The simple solution for him would have been to appoint one of the White House counsel, probably, as acting Attorney General, who would have fired Cox. And at that point, I don't think anybody would have stayed with that acting Attorney General.
You must remember that there was great resentment in the De­partment of Justice about Mr. Nixon already because he had de­manded resignation letters when his new—when his second term started down as far as I think GS-16's or 15's. He made the really unprecedented demand that all the top echelon sign resignation letters, and they were not very happy with him. And if he had sent in an outsider whom they did not know to discharge Mr. Cox, I think there would have been massive departures. And Mr. Richardson thought so, too. Senator HUMPHREY. And what about Ruckelshaus? Judge BORK. I don't recall if he has ever spoken to that or not. Senator HUMPHREY. Eliot Richardson, the Attorney General, expressed to you, before you discharged Cox, his opinion that the Department would be reduced to chaos if you did not follow the President's orders. Judge BORK. I don't recall the exact—has he been quoted lately
in the paper or something? I haven't—I don't recall the exact language he used. Senator HUMPHREY. But did Richardson speak to you on that account before you fired Cox? Judge BORK. Oh, yes. We discussed this morning the first conversation I had about this with Mr. Richardson and Ruckelshaus in
which they said, if you do it, don't resign. After he came back from
the White House late in the afternoon, he said some—I didn't
regard this as urging me because I think he knew I was about to do
it. But he said, somebody has got to do it. It has got to be done and
you are the guy to do it. Senator HUMPHREY. SO he, he encouraged you—if ii was within
your own judgment to do so, he encouraged you to comply with the
order and not resign? Judge BORK. That is right. Senator HUMPHREY. SO Eliot Richardson, who is regarded as a
hero for having resigned rather than fire Cox, in advance of your
firing Cox advised you to fire Cox and to not resign; is that correct? Judge BORK. Well, he—I want to be careful about this because at
the time he said somebody has to do it and you are the guy to do it,
you are the fellow to do it Senator HUMPHREY. YOU were the last one Judge BORK. I was the last one. Senator HUMPHREY. In the hierarchy to Judge BORK. But at the time he said that, he knew that I was
inclined to do it. So I wouldn't put—I wouldn't put the responsibility for my actions upon Eliot Richardson. Senator HUMPHREY. I wasn't trying to get you to do that. Judge BORK. NO, I know you weren't, but I just want to be very
careful not to give that impression. Senator HUMPHREY. I understand the distinction. But Eliot Richardson did confide to you that he thought it would be well if you
fired Cox and did not yourself resign as he had resigned? Judge BORK. I think that is accurate. But I think he knew I was
going to do it when he said that.
I mean, I don't want in any way to rest upon Richardson as a
crutch for me. I do—it is accurate to say that he agreed with my
assessment, but I didn't do it because Eliot said that. Senator HUMPHREY. Before the fact? Judge BORK. NO. That is right.Senator HUMPHREY. Judge, I want to turn to the area of civil
rights. I was intrigued by the matter that Senator Heflin brought
up about the breaking down of barriers to Jewish lawyers or quotas
or some such thing at the law firm Judge BORK. Um-hum.
Senator HUMPHREY. Where you were employed. Can you expand upon that? You were responsible for
Judge BORK. Well, I don't know that I destroyed the quota, but I began the destruction of it and—and there were other young people like me. It just happened to be that I had talked to this young man, who is even today a very good friend of mine. In fact, he was the best man at my second wedding. I talked to this young man whom I did not know but I liked, and it seemed to me grossly unfair that he should be excluded from the firm on the grounds that he was Jewish.
So I—and I went and talked to a classmate of his who was also then at the firm. A man named Alan Oaks. And Oaks confirmed me in my view of this fellow, and so I went to the senior partner, two senior partners, and said you can't do this. You can't—we can't operate a law firm that way. And one or two of them weren't too happy, but they finally agreed. They said, we will give him a trial. He was a great success.
Senator HUMPHREY. HOW long had you been at the law firm when you approached the senior partners?
Judge BORK. I would guess—let's see. I would guess two years.
Senator HUMPHREY. TWO years. And you were approaching part­ners who had been with the firm for how many years? Judge BORK. Forty. Senator HUMPHREY. Forty years? Judge BORK. Well, but I had been working with them. I mean, they knew me.
Senator HUMPHREY. Um-hum.
Judge BORK. I mean, it wasn't
Senator HUMPHREY. Well, nonetheless
Judge BORK. I didn't have to break in to see them or anything. I mean, it was not that dramatic.
Senator HUMPHREY. Well, it is still impressive to me, at least, that a junior member of the firm with 2 years' seniority only would go and talk to veterans of 40 years who were very fixed in their ways about changing an apparently longstanding policy at the firm.
Judge BORK. I am just trying to think, Senator. You know, if it turns out—it may turn out to be 4 years I had been there. I can't recall exactly when this young man came. But I don't—you know, something like 2 to 4 years.
Senator HUMPHREY. I am one of the three members of this panel, Judge, who is not a lawyer, and I hope that maybe that will help me to cut through some of this lawyerly fog which sometimes en­shrouds this proceeding.
You have said, and I admire you for this because you not only say it but practice it. You have said that judges ought to—ought not to interpose their personal views when reaching decisions. Nonetheless, I want to probe your personal views, and then we will go and talk about your decisions a little later. I want to probe your personal views.
Some of your opponents, particularly those outside this room, have all but called you a racist. Maybe they have. I wouldn't be surprised. But they have all but called you a racist. Let me ask you how does it feel to be accused in front of your family and in front
of tens of millions of your fellow citizens of being a racist? Judge BORK. Well, it doesn't feel too good, but my family knows
better and anybody who knows me knows better. Senator HUMPHREY. Are you a racist? Judge BORK. NO, Senator. Senator HUMPHREY. What are your feelings about racism, about
racial discrimination? Judge BORK. I have always said it was immoral. The only thing I
ever did was, in my libertarian phase, doubt that law should be
used to overcome private immorality. I have since decided that law
should be used to overcome that private immorality, but I have—
you will never find in any of my writings anywhere, or any of my
statements anywhere, any statement or writing in any way supporting or favoring racial segregation or discrimination. Senator HUMPHREY. Well, of course, you are not a racist because we examine the attitudes of nominees for the bench very carefully
in that respect. Our staff investigate a candidate's or nominee's
background very carefully in that respect, and you would not have
been confirmed unanimously to the second most important court in
this country 5 years ago if there were a shred of evidence that you
were a racist. And so I am just shocked and really disgusted at the
tactics of some of these groups which oppose you when they imply
and all but state that you are a racist. Do you support—personally again. We will get to your cases in a
while. But personally, do you support all of the great civil rights
legislation?Judge BORK. Yes. I think the Fair Housing—I think the 1964 Act
really did an enormous amount to bring the country together and
bring blacks into the mainstream, and I think that is the way I
should have judged the statute in the first place, instead of on
these abstract libertarian principles. I think the Voting Rights Act has been enormously successful in
improving the quality of black life, particularly in the South, because they became a voting group that politicians had to listen to
once they got access to the polls. I think the Fair Housing Act was an extremely good statute. I
have no problem with any of those statutes now. Senator HUMPHREY. Your opponents have remarkably exploited the understandable concerns of black citizens on this subject, and I
regret that as much as I regret the de facto and the de jure discrimination which existed for so long in this country against blacks
and other minorities. And I regret that very much. We understand the concerns of women. We understand how unscrupulous groups can so easily exploit these concerns given the
fact that women traditionally, again de facto and de jure, have
gotten the short end of the stick in this country. I resent that practice, for the sake of my wife, as I am sure you do for the sake of
your wife; I resent it for the sake of my mother; I resent it for the
sake of my sister, and I resent it for the sake of our country, and I
know you feel the same way.
So let me ask you now your personal feelings about discrimination on the basis of sex.
Judge BORK. I have never remotely supported that, and it is un­fortunate that these themes have been so confidently asserted by a number of people.
I have here, and I intend to offer when Senator DeConcini is here, the list of my Solicitor General briefs, amicus briefs, and the list of my decisions in the area of race and gender on the court of appeals.
It turns out—I did not know this when I spoke this morning-^ but if you make a count, it turns out that in eight cases I voted for the minority or the woman seven times. I do not know what more I can do to dispel any fear that somebody might have.
Senator HUMPHREY. YOU are saying that in your 5 years on the bench, eight cases have come before you
Judge BORK. On the merits, yes.
Senator HUMPHREY. Involving civil rights?
Judge BORK. Yes.
Senator HUMPHREY. DO not enumerate them now, because I have got them and I want to enumerate them. Judge BORK. All right. Senator HUMPHREY. But you are saying that in seven out of those eight cases, you have ruled with the minority or the woman?
Judge BORK. Or the woman, or women, yes.
Senator HUMPHREY. That comports with my statistics as well.
I would repeat at this point before I ask you to tell us about some of these decisions, that in discussing your personal feelings, I do not mean to suggest that your personal feelings will or ought to come into play when you act the part of the judge.
Judge BORK. NO, but people always suspect that they will, Sena­tor; I have learned that.
Senator HUMPHREY. Yes. People suspect the worst. That is the es­sence of judicial restraint, is it not? The essence of your judicial philosophy is that judges should not interpose personal feelings or biases?
Judge BORK. That is quite true. Fortunately, in the area of civil rights, my personal views do not vary from nondiscrimination.
Senator HUMPHREY. Well, then, we have looked at the person, however briefly. Let us look at Robert Bork, the judge. You have participated in decisions on eight civil rights cases which have come before you on the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. These were cases where substantive civil rights claims were at issue. And as you noted, you ruled in favor of the minority or the woman in seven out of the eight cases, the entire universe, as Robert Bork, the judge, seven out of eight cases. Do you know what that is in decimal—87.5, 87% percent.
And I am going to talk about the one where you did not rule, because you were right there, too.
Judge BORK. I am sorry. I should say that there was one case—I have seven out of eight cases—Paralyzed Veterans, I dissented, saying that an airport was not covered by a federal program, and the Supreme Court adopted my view.
Senator HUMPHREY. YOU have often been upheld by the Supreme Court when you have been in the minority, haven't you? Judge BORK. Yes.
86-974 0 - 89 - 12
Senator HUMPHREY. In fact, of all of the cases in which you participated, in which you were a minority participant—that is, in
which you joined with the minority view—some 25, I believe it is—
rightJudge BORK. I think Senator HUMPHREY. Six of those have been successfully appealed to the Supreme Court, and the Court found you
right in how many of those six? Judge BORK. I think, all of them. Senator HUMPHREY. Six, that is right. Do you know what the percentage is, the decimal—1.0000. Even when Robert Bork has been
on the minority side of the question, and when that case has come
to the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court has upheld the views of
Robert BORK. Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HUMPHREY. And so he has never been overruled, has he,
whether he has been in the majority or in the minority? Judge BORK. That is correct, Senator. Senator HUMPHREY. Pretty damned remarkable—pretty darned
remarkable—we all change on reconsideration.  Senator HUMPHREY. NOW, some claim that all of this is irrele­vant, that the record of Robert Bork, the judge, does not mean a
thing because circuit court judges are bound inextricably by Supreme Court precedent. Now, I want to ask you—I am not overlooking that charge, but I
hope to lay it to rest in the next few minutes. Let us take issues of sex discrimination. In the case of Ososky v.
Wick in 1983, you voted to overturn the lower court, and you held
that the Equal Pay Act—equal pay for equal work, ladies and gentlemen—you held that the Equal Pay Act in fact applies to the Foreign Service's merit system. Judge BORK. Yes, I think Senator HUMPHREY. Let me finish, and then you can expand on
it—that the Equal Pay Act requires equal pay for women, and you
ruled that the Act applied to the State Department. In other words,
you ruled in favor of a plaintiff who was a woman. And I would
like at this point for you to tell us something more about this case,
but before you do, let me say this is a "two-fer", if you will. Not
only did you rule in favor of the plaintiff who was a woman, but
this is a case where you ruled in favor of an individual against the
institution of the Government. And there is hardly a worse institution within that institution than the State Department—but that is
a political observation. Now, would you tell us what you think more we need to know
about that case? Judge BORK. Well, to tell you the truth, Senator, I have not reread that case for quite a while, and I just remember there was an
argument that the Foreign Service was not subject to the Equal
Pay Act, and we ruled that it was. The case, I think, was Palmer v.
Schultz.
Senator HUMPHREY. That is a similar case. Judge BORK. Yes. Well, Ososky v. Wick, I think, was more the
question of whether solely on statistical evidence of promotions and
advancements and grades and classes, you could infer intentional
discrimination, and we held that you could. I do not think either of those decisions was dictated by Supreme
Court precedent, but it certainly was in line with Supreme Court
precedent.Senator HUMPHREY. Okay. Well, that comes to the point I wanted to raise next. In ruling in this case, did you feel in any way
bound by Supreme Court precedent to reach your decision? Judge BORK. I do not recall that I did, Senator. I think I felt
bound by the statute and by the Senator HUMPHREY. Intent of Congress. Judge BORK. Yes, and by the logic. Senator HUMPHREY. SO you were not inextricably bound to reach
this decision in this case by Supreme Court precedent? Judge BORK. Not at all. If I had a desire to reach a result con­trary, I am sure I could have crafted an argument that would have
sounded moderately plausible, but I had no such desire. Senator HUMPHREY. Okay. Now, if that is not good enough for those who contend that your decisions on the circuit court are immaterial, let me ask you this. If the same case under the same circumstance came before you as a Supreme Court—Supreme Court—
Justice, would you decide it the same way? Judge BORK. My reasoning would be identical. It is a question of
whether the statute applies. I thought it applied when I was on the
court of appeals; I would think it would have applied on the Supreme Court. Senator HUMPHREY. SO you are saying two things, that (a) you had latitude as a circuit court justice in this case, and (b) even
where you would have had unquestioned latitude within the constraints of stare decisis and so on, that you would have ruled the
same way as a Supreme Court Justice. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HUMPHREY. Well, I hope that satisfies the cynics. But if
it does not, we have got a few more to go through.
The next case was Laffey v. Northwest Airlines in 1984. In that
case, you upheld a lower court decision which found that an airline
had discriminated against women employees. Tell us about that case. Judge BORK. Well, as I recall that case, Senator, these were
stewardesses who could not get the job of purser. And as I recall
the job of purser, only men had that job, and it was a much higher-
paid job, and they would not let women be pursers. And as I recall,
there was really no significant, or maybe no difference in the
duties of stewardesses and pursers. So the Equal Pay Act applied,
and we directed that they determine the back pay awards by calculating total job experience.Senator HUMPHREY. With interest? Judge BORK. Yes, as I recall. Senator HUMPHREY. Back pay with interest. And did you feel
somehow bound by Supreme Court precedent in this matter? Judge BORK. Well, I cannot recall exactly what the precedent
was, but I remember sitting down with my colleagues and then
with my clerks and deciding that this is the way it had to come
out, and going through a process of reasoning; so I suppose I did
not feel that I was bound by Supreme Court precedent, but I
cannot swear to it. I have not re-read the opinion. Senator HUMPHREY. I understand. Like legislators, you go through a lot of business, and it is hard to remember all the details. But in any event the record shows that that is the case as
stated. And just for the record, had you been a Supreme Court Justice
and that same case came before you, would you have ruled otherwise? Judge BORK. Identical; I would have given an identical result, Senator. Senator HUMPHREY. Let us take a case that will be of interest to citizens who are homosexuals, or to all citizens who are concerned
about the legitimate rights of citizens—which is most of us. In the case of Doe v. Weinberger—Secretary Weinberger, that
is—excuse me. Let me back up, because I skipped one. And this is
one that you alluded to a moment ago. In 1987, in the case of
Palmer v. Schultz, George Schultz, of the State Department, you
ruled in favor of women Foreign Service officers who allege discrimination by the State Department, and you overturned the district court, the lower court, in this case. Can you recall the details of that? Judge BORK. Palmer v. Schultz? Senator HUMPHREY. Yes. Judge BORK. I do not recall the details, I am sorry to say. I just
remember that there was such a case and that we—if you want me
to, I can overnight take a look at it Senator HUMPHREY. NO, that is all right. If anyone else wants to question you in detail, they can. Perhaps it is unfair for me to put
you in a position where I am asking you to recall the details. I was
just hoping that you could reinforce it a little bit. Judge BORK. Well, sometimes, I do—not always, though. Senator HUMPHREY. In any case, the record clearly shows that
you overturned the opinion of the lower court, district court, and
found in favor of women—I think it was seven or eight in
number—who alleged discrimination by the State Department.
And you agreed with them, you upheld them, you overturned the
lower court case. Did you feel somehow unduly bound by precedent, Supreme
Court precedent?Judge BORK. I do not recall that I did, Senator, but I do not really recall much about the case, so I cannot be as enlightening as
I would like to be. Senator HUMPHREY. DO you suppose if it had come before you as a Supreme Court Justice, you would have ruled otherwise? Judge BORK. NO, no. I must say that the case on the Supreme Court for reading a statute consistently is very strong, even if there
were precedent—I do not know if there was precedent. Senator HUMPHREY. Okay. Now to go to the case of Doe v. Wein­berger, you ruled in favor of a man who had been fired from the
National Security Agency for homosexuality. You ruled that he
had been unlawfully denied his right to a hearing. Judge BORK. That is correct.
Senator HUMPHREY. I will not ask you about the details of that,
but was that a decision you arrived at because you were bound by
precedent?Judge BORK. No. We thought the regulation about what kind of a
hearing he would get, and the statute, I guess, pretty clearly required that he have a hearing before his security clearance was
lifted and he was discharged. Senator HUMPHREY. Would you have reached some other conclusion if it had come before you as a Supreme Court Justice? Judge BORK. Not at all, Senator; the same conclusion. Senator HUMPHREY. Okay. Let us look at race discrimination
cases. In 1987, the case of Emory v. Secretary of the Navy, you overruled the district court which had dismissed the claim of racial discrimination. In this case, a black officer charged that the promotion board, which was comprised entirely of Caucasians, presented
a case of discrimination against him; he lost in the lower courts; he
won in the circuit court, where you sat. Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HUMPHREY. Here is another case of Robert Bork standing against the Government in favor of the individual, as well as
these others I have cited. And would you have reached a different
opinion if that case had come to you in your capacity as a Supreme
Court Justice? Judge BORK. NO, Senator, I would not. I would reach the same
conclusion because it was clear that this man was entitled to go to
trial to try to prove discrimination. And it got dismissed before he
got to present his evidence. Senator HUMPHREY. All right. In the 1984 case of County Council
of Sumter County, South Carolina v. United States, you held that
the county had failed to prove its new voting system had neither
the purpose nor the effect of denying or abridging the right of
black South Carolinians to vote. Judge BORK. That is correct. I remember that case fairly well because it is the first time I sat on a three-judge district court and
took evidence. And we held not only that—the first argument was
that the at-large election system involved in that case did not require pre-clearance by the Attorney General, and we held that it
did. And then we went on to hold that the county had failed to establish that the switch from a district system to an at-large system
had neither the purpose nor the effect of submerging the black
vote. So we ruled for the black plaintiffs in the case. Senator HUMPHREY. Your finding was not based on the intention
to discriminate, but the effect of discrimination; is that not correct? Judge BORK. Yes. Actually, the plaintiff was the county council,
and they were claiming that they did not have to be pre-cleared
and so forth, so it was their burden to show no purpose and effect,
and we said they had not shown the absence of either. Senator HUMPHREY. In this decision, you were roundly criticized
by conservatives, weren't you?
Judge BORK. I do not recall. Senator HUMPHREY. Well, you were. Judge BORK. Oh, okay. Senator HUMPHREY. Take it from me. But nonetheless, you
upheld the standard enacted by the Congress.
Judge BORK. Right. Senator HUMPHREY. NOW let us talk about the exception. You
were with the minority person, or the woman, in seven out of eight
of the entire universe of civil rights cases you have handled as a
judge. Let us talk about the exception. That was the case of Rollis
v. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Judge BORK. I am afraid that is not on my list. I guess we did not
classify it as a women and minority rights case. Senator HUMPHREY. Well, maybe I have been given some incorrect information. Judge BORK. I have one here Senator HUMPHREY. Excuse me. This is a case of age discrimination, so I think it is valid in the context of the discussion we are
having here.Judge BORK. Oh, oh, oh, yes, yes. I guess my list is on women's and minority rights Senator HUMPHREY. Yes. Judge BORK. And I guess we did not have age discrimination as a minority rights case. Senator HUMPHREY. Yes. Well, why not age? We have looked at
everything else, right? Judge BORK. Fine, fine. I am at the mercy of the people who categorize these things for me. Senator HUMPHREY. Yes. In any event, the plaintiff alleged
that—the finding was—and from which you dissented—the finding
was—I had better read this carefully, because it has been some
time since I looked at it. The CHAIRMAN. Senator, after this question, your time is up, but
keep going. I just want you to know Senator HUMPHREY. Yes, I will just finish up very quickly. The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead and finish the whole line if you would
like, but I just want you to know we are at 30, so we can go to Senator Simon. Senator HUMPHREY. Fine. The district court had dismissed an age discrimination case, and
you joined with the majority. In any event, your view was that the
Age Discrimination Act does not apply extra-territorially, is that
correct? Judge BORK. That is right. Senator HUMPHREY. DO you remember that case? Judge BORK. That was Radio Free Europe, or something of that
sort? Senator HUMPHREY. Yes, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
Can you fill in the details of the case?
Judge BORK. Oh, I just recall, I think it was an argument over
the meaning of the statute, its text and legislative history. And I
wish I could reconstruct it for you better than that, but I am afraid
I cannot. I did not even remember I was in the minority. It seemed
to me that the Act applied, as I recall, to the United States, but not
to Americans in foreign countries. Senator HUMPHREY. Yes. Is that accepted wisdom, that U.S. statutes don't apply extraterritorially?
Judge BORK. That's a very complex field, and sometimes—it de­pends upon what Congress says, of course—but sometimes Congress
doesn't make it clear either way and then you have a lot of presumptions and so forth to go through to figure out whether or not
the statute should be applied that way. Senator HUMPHREY. The point I wanted to make is that in this age case, where you did not find with the plaintiffs in the discrimination case, it sounds to me like a very reasonable interpretation
of the law. Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I thank you for one thing. You have
just changed my statistics. Now it looks like I voted for the plaintiff in seven out of nine cases, rather than seven out of eight. I
hadn't included the age discrimination case in here. Senator HUMPHREY. I had hoped to have the time—and I guess I will wait until the next round—to talk about your efforts to uphold
civil rights in the capacity as Solicitor General. Let me just ask very quickly—and I promise I won't prolong
this—some have alleged that this doesn't, either, that the Solicitor
General is working for a client. Can you tell us whether that is a
true assertion or not, or does the Solicitor General have some latitude and, if so, how much? Judge BORK. Well, he has latitude in different kinds of cases. If
he is working for the Government as a client, and there's a lawsuit,
I think my view of the Solicitor General's job is that he must take
the Government's position so long as it is intellectually and morally respectable.If he is filing an amicus brief, I think he has more latitude, because he is speaking to the Court not for a client but about a position that he thinks the Court should regard as making sense. Senator HUMPHREY. Thank you very much. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. Senator Simon. Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, if it's any comfort to you, I'm the last questioner
here.
I might note that you have had read to you a few things that you
now disagree with. I did find this one sentence of yours in your
opinion in Oilman v. Evans. You say "Those who step into areas of
public dispute and choose the pleasures and distractions of controversy must be willing to bear criticism, disparagement, and even
wounding assessments." My guess is you still will hold by that
statement here today. Judge BORK. Yes, Senator. I hope that isn't a prelude to a wounding assessment.  Senator SIMON. One area that is of concern to me is an area
where you on the Court would have a great deal to say, where Congress has to a great extent stayed out, and that is the whole question of where we draw the line between church and state.
What we have evolved is a system that is basically very healthy,
both for religion and for government. I am concerned that we don't
make major modifications of it.
In 1984, in a speech at the University of Chicago, you talked
about the three tests that are used. Let me quote Justice Powell on
what is called the Lemon test. Justice Powell, in Wallace v. Jaffree, wrote "I write separately to express additional views and to respond to criticism of the three-pronged Lemon test. Lemon v. Kurtzman identified standards that have proven useful in analyzing case
after case, both in our decisions and those of other courts. It is the
only coherent test the majority of the Court has ever adopted." In your speech at the University of Chicago, you talk about that
test rather critically. You say, if this text is accurate, "The third
test, no excessive entanglement between government and religion,
is impossible to satisfy. Government is inevitably entangled with
religion." You then talk about entanglement, though the third part
of the test is not simply entanglement but excessive entanglement. Then in a speech at Brookings, in 1985, if this is correct, you say,
"Many observers expected a major recasting of doctrine. But the
Supreme Court this past term surprised them by adhering to the
old test. Eventually, however, we may see such a reformulation,
not because I think the attitude of the Court will change—although, of course, it may—and not because of political pressures,
but because, as observers of this area commonly remark, present
doctrine is so unsatisfactory." Then let me skip a few sentences. You say, "Constitutional doctrine cannot separate either religion in law or religion in politics."
Then I will skip several sentences, but I don't think I'm taking
things out of context. "A relaxation of current, rigidly-secularist
doctrine would in the first place permit some sensible things to be
done." And then I'll skip a sentence. You say, "I suspect that the
greatest perceived change would be in the reintroduction of some
religion into public schools." Now, do these texts that I have quote you accurately, as far as
you know? Judge BORK. Yes, they do, Senator. Senator SIMON. What do you mean by this phrase, "I suspect
that the greatest perceived change would be in the reintroduction
of some religion into public schools"? Judge BORK. There are only two cases I have ever criticized in this area, and they're both very marginal cases. In this case, I
thought the Supreme Court had gone fairly far when it said—not
unanimously, as I recall—that a school could not put up the Ten
Commandments in the school on the wall, even though it put underneath the Ten Commandments the statement that "this is not
an endorsement of a religion; it's part of our cultural heritage", as,
indeed, it is fundamental to both the Jewish and Christian traditions. That's all I meant by that. It seemed to me it was getting a
little excessive, I thought. The other thing I said, "some sensible things to be done"—I was
talking about Aguilar v. Felton, in which, under a federal program,
the city of New York had public school teachers go into private
schools, including religious schools, to teach educationally deprived
children who were far behind in their subjects, remedial reading
and remedial arithmetic and so forth. The program was conducted in rooms bare of religious symbolism; the materials used had no religious content; there was no
interaction between the public school teacher and the religious
people—they often weren't even of the same faith.
That passed the first two tests of the Lemon test, secular in pur­pose and did not advance religion, but it failed because they said there was excessive entanglement since the city had to make sure that religion didn't creep into the program. That struck me as kind of an odd thing to strike down a program.
The lower court judge, who agreed—Henry Friendly, a famous judge—who agreed that the program failed the third aspect of the Lemon test on excessive entanglement, because the city had to police to make sure that religion didn't get into it, said that it was a program that had done much good and little, if any, discernible harm. So it seemed to me to be kind of too bad.
Now, there was some suggestion, I guess, that if they had taken the children out of the school and walked them down the block and into a trailer, they could have had the program. That seemed to me a little odd.
But this area is full of line drawing and sometimes you think they draw the line too far on one side or the other. I have not in any way questioned, and would not in any way question, the basic importance of the establishment clause in preventing the establish­ment of religion, or the basic importance of the free exercise clause. But sometimes, and it's often 5 to 4, a case like Aguilar or a case like the Ten Commandment case doesn't seem to me as essen­tial to prevent the establishment of religion. But, you know, that's on the margin. I'm not talking about anything more than that.
Senator SIMON. Let me ask another question on line drawing, without projecting how you might rule in the future. Let me give you a very practical example.
When I served in the House, my colleague, Congressman Dan Glickman, told me about when he was in the fourth grade. He hap­pens to be Jewish, growing up in a community that was largely not Jewish. Every day he was excused from the classroom while they had a prayer, and then he was brought back in. Every day, all the other fourth graders were being told that Danny Glickman is dif­ferent, and yes, every day he was being told that he was different.
We have the Engel decision in 1962, of a prescribed prayer that was to be required daily. The courts ruled that was unconstitution­al. As you reflect on that, was that a sound decision?
Judge BORK. I have not ever thought through that subject. This is not an area I ever taught. The reason I want to say that is that the Washington Post carried a story that at the Brookings Institu­tion, in the speech you quote, I had endorsed school prayer, which is entirely false. But I thought I should bring to your attention, therefore, two letters, one of which went to the Post, one of which was printed and one of which was not. I would like to put these in the record, but I would like to cite them
The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, they will both be placed in the record.
Judge BORK. The first is from Mr. Warren I. Cikins, who is a senior staff member at Brookings and ran this seminar program at which I spoke—and he was there. Mr. Cikins doesn't say in the letter, but he tells me—and I'm sure he wouldn't mind my saying it—that he's devout Jew. He kept notes. It's his program and he kept notes of the evening.
He starts off by saying that he's quite concerned about the fact that people—it was off the record, meaning a give and take—that people said what happened. He says:
Whatever one's views are about Judge Bork's qualifications to serve on the Su­preme Court, he certainly is entitled to a thorough and accurate review of his opin­ions. In examining my notes of that meeting, I find no reference to any specific Su­preme Court decision but only the expression of broad concepts and principles. I find no opinion expressed by the Judge on the issue of school prayer but only the comment that the current turmoil in constitutional law may force some revisions.
One must remember that the context of this session at Brookings was the airing of a wide range of views on matters of church and state, in an aura of reconcilia­tion, not confrontation. While Judge Bork was challenged frequently by members of the seminar, he responded with grace and an inquiring mind and willingly extended the discussion period well beyond its adjournment time.
Since this is a serious matter, Senator, I do not come at this with either a religious or an anti-religious bias. I come at this—But this letter, which was printed in the Post, is from Rabbi Joshua O. Ha­berman.
He said:
It is a good thing that I was there when Judge Bork met with a group of clergy at a Brookings Institution dinner for religious leaders in September, 1985, because if I had nothing but your account from the paper of that evening's discussion, I would draw entirely wrong conclusions about Judge Bork's view on church and state issues. Your reporter was not present at the meeting. I was. As a rabbi, with a strong commitment to the separation of church and state, I would have been greatly alarmed if Judge Bork had expressed any tendency to move away from our constitu­tional guarantee of religious freedom inequality. I heard nothing of the sort.
As a matter of fact, the rest of the letter is so laudatory that I think it would be improper for me to read it, but I would like you to read it, Senator. 
Senator SIMON. I shall.
Judge BORK. Because I have never taken a position on school prayer, I have never taught the school prayer cases, I have never
written about it, I have never even fought my way through the
problem. The only thing I am convinced of is that the principle of
non-establishment is essential to our society, and I know the framers thought so, particularly with the memory of the religious wars
in Europe in mind, and I think the principle of free exercise is also
vitally important. But where the adjustments are made at the
margin is a question that goes case-by-case. Senator SIMON. One of the things in this area that we also have to do is to protect the rights of religious minorities, the Seventh-
day Adventists, Jehovah's Witnesses and so forth. Do you have any
reflections upon the Supreme Court decision on saluting the flag by the Jehovah's Witnesses?
Judge BORK. I have never taught that case or thought about it.
May I say something, that there is so much in a constitutional
law casebook that in one semester you have to choose and select
pretty severely, so those are just areas that I never taught.
Senator SIMON. Let me just add—and I think my colleagues would agree, whether they happen to be for you or not—that you have gone into much greater detail on cases than any recent wit­ness that we have had before this committee.
Let me get into an area where I have some concerns with your answers, both yesterday and today, and that is that I think I sense a tendency to view the Constitution as fairly rigid, in terms of the expansion of liberty. The Supreme Court is the basic guarantor of liberty.
As we look at the application of it, wherever possible, that liberty should be expanded. You mentioned Justice Harlan in theGriswold case that Senator Biden mentioned. Justice Harlan in his
opinion referred to his earlier opinion in Poe v. Ullman.
Justice Harlan says, in a couple of sentences that I had never
seen before, that I think really are significant, and I'm going to use
them on other occasions in the future. In that opinion he says,
"Liberty is not a series of isolated points pricked out in terms of
the taking of property, the freedom of speech, press and religion,
the right to keep and bear arms, the freedom from unreasonable
searches and seizures and so on. It is a rational continuum which,
broadly speaking, includes a freedom from all substantial, arbitrary impositions and purposeless restraints." That's pretty power­ful, pretty eloquent.
Judge BORK. Yes.
Senator SIMON. It seems to me, as we look at some of these cases, that we have to look at how liberty can be expanded without doing harm. One point, in a speech at Berkeley in 1985, you say—and I would be interested in any comments you have here—"What a court adds to one person's constitutional rights it subtracts from the rights of others." Do you believe that is always true?
Judge BORK. Yes, Senator. I think it's a matter of plain arithme­tic. I think our Constitution gives a constitutional right or a liberty in areas where the Bill of Rights or the Civil War amendments don't prohibit it, of citizens to sit down and elect their representa­tives and make their laws.
If a court strikes down such laws on behalf of a plaintiff claiming a liberty, it automatically deprives the first group of its liberty. So what you're talking about here is a redistribution of liberty.
Now, that seems to me to be arithmetically solid. I don't think there is any way you can get around it. But if the Constitution says the majority doesn't have that liberty, they shouldn't; where it says they do have that liberty, it should.
Senator SIMON. But that arithmetic equation isn't always quite true. In other words, if you give slaves freedom, I suppose, using your analogy, you then take away the freedom of slave owners.
Judge BORK. That is a redistribution of liberties, commanded by the 13th amendment to the Constitution. I certainly have no objection to a redistribution of liberties whenever the Constitution requires it or authorizes it. No objection whatsoever.
What I was talking about was judges who make up new liberties
and say that they are expanding liberty. Well, they are for some
people, but they're contracting it for other people. That's all I was saying.
Senator SIMON. All right.
We have talked about the 1954 Brown decision. In 1954 you were an attorney for one year. Do you recall what you thought about the Brown decision at that point?
Judge BORK. Yes, I did, but I thought—I was not an attorney. I was working then on—Edward Levi hired me as a research associate on what he called the antitrust project. That's where I picked up the basic economics such as I got.
I recall that in law school, I think it was argued and then rear­gued, and I always thought it would come down the way it did. I
must confess that at that time it seemed to me good enough that it
would come down that way, because that was the moral result. That's all I needed.
Since then I have tried to give a rather more sophisticated con­stitutional support for the case. Senator SIMON. What about the 1942 decision of the Court on
Japanese Americans? I mention this because I recall my father—
we lived in Eugene, Oregon then—I recall my father, speaking up
and saying this is wrong to do to Japanese Americans. And I remember so few people standing up, it was a very unpopular stand
my father took, and I remember that even as a very young boy, then—the Court failing to stand up for Japanese Americans.
Judge BORK. They certainly did, they certainly did. It failed, and I think that case has been regarded as a constitutional disaster
ever since.
It was a period—I guess when the interning took place, I must have been around 15 or 16, and I lived in the East, so I do not have
any first-hand experience with it. But I do recall that there was
considerable hysteria about the war, and about rumors of what was
going to happen on the West Coast with sabotage and invasion, and
I think that was probably accelerated or multiplied by racial animosities as well, and the Supreme Court should have made sure
that something real was going on, which it was not. There was no real espionage or sabotage program.
The Supreme Court took the word of some authorities for it, and that was that. And I think that was a constitutional disaster. Senator SIMON. And as you examine Robert Bork, if you are in a
situation where you are demanded to make a very unpopular deci­sion, but it complies with the Constitution, is your personal consti­tution of such a nature that you can make such an unpopular deci­sion, as it would have been in the case of the Japanese Americans?
Judge BORK. I think so, Senator, because as you may have no­ticed in these hearings, I have been taking unpopular positions frequently in my life. I remember when I was one of the only two professors at all of Yale—not the law school, but at all of Yale, in a
faculty of 2,000—who would admit to being for Goldwater. And
every morning as I walked in to work, I had to have 15 arguments, and by the time I got to my office I needed a shower again.
No—I have been in a minority position many times. I do not love it, but I am not afraid of it.
Senator SIMON. I had my staff dig out the Dred Scott decision,
and I read the majority opinion by Justice Taney. It sounded an
awful lot like Robert Bork in terms of saying we cannot read into
the Constitution what is not there, when they denied free blacks
the right to be citizens.
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I take that a little hard. That does
not sound a lot like Robert Bork. It happens to be that the Dred
Scott decision, I think, is the first time the doctrine of substantive
due process was raised by the Supreme Court—substantive due
process being the doctrine that the due process clause imposes
limits on government, and the Court makes it up. It is one of these
free-floating things again which the Court used in the past to strike down economic regulation.
Chief Justice Taney in Dred Scott said that it would be a viola­tion of the due process clause to take away a black slave from a
white owner.
So you see, these doctrines which give judges power to make up their own constitutional law, which was what Taney did in that
case, do not always produce results that today we think are fine;
sometimes, they produce disastrous results. And Dred Scott produced a disastrous result not only for Dred Scott, but for the Nation and helped to lead up to the Civil War.
Senator SIMON. Let me just quote the Chief Justice at that point. "It is not the province of the Court to decide upon the justice or
injustice of the policy or impolicy of these laws. The decision of
that question belonged to the political or lawmaking power, those
who formed the sovereignty and framed the Constitution. The duty
of the Court is to interpret the instrument they have framed, with
the best lights we can obtain on the subject, and to administer it as
we find it according to its true intent and meaning when it was adopted."
Judge BORK. Senator, anybody—the Devil can quote scripture, and Taney can talk about original intent, as people did. But the
fact is he used the due process clause in a way he never should
have used it, against the black man, and Curtis' dissent, I think, is the original intent position in that case.
Senator SIMON. Let me ask one more on the Griswold case. The ninth amendment grew out of Hamilton and others questioning
whether the rest of the Bill of Rights was going to be so explicit it
would deny other rights, and so Madison wrote the ninth amend­ment.
In theory, if the State of Connecticut can ban contraceptives, could not in theory—and you are a legal theorist—could not in theory the State of Connecticut require the use of contraceptives?
Judge BORK. I may be a legal—I doubt that I am even a legal theorist; I engage in legal theory from time to time—but I do not
usually engage in legal theory instantly. I never thought about a
statute requiring the use of contraceptives, nor do I know exactly
how you would police it or what you would do with it. And I do not want to imagine how you would police it.
Senator SIMON. That is a problem with the original law, of course, too.Judge BORK. Yes. Senator SIMON. But my concern is that I do not want someone on
the Court who is going to be so rigid in the application of liberty
that there is not some expansion and growth in liberty for the people of this country.
Judge BORK. Let me put it this way, Senator, and this is the best I can do. If you will read those cases—I have got a good voting
record on civil rights and constitutional rights and so forth, but if
you will read the one essay—I wrote an extended essay on this,
largely because my good friend, now Justice Scalia, was going the
other way on the case, and we got into a wrangle about it—and
that is Oilman v. Evans, in which I apply and expand a first
amendment freedom for the press. I do not believe that constitutional freedom should be given a narrow or a crabbed construction,
and I have never given such a narrow or a crabbed construction to
them. In fact, just the other day, I think a case came down on the
double jeopardy clause in which I reversed a new sentence on
double jeopardy grounds. That, I should say, before somebody
makes the accusation that has been made, that was a case that was
voted on and assigned to me long before this nomination came up,
assigned to me by Judge Mikva, who was the senior member of the
panel. You look at my opinions, and you will see no reason to expect
any crabbed or narrow interpretation of any clause. And those
clauses have to evolve as circumstances and technologies and other
things change, so that they are continued to be given their full and fair value.
But, Senator, I must confess, if you say to me here is an outra­geous statute, and that is all the lawyer can say to me, that is not
enough for me to strike it down. It may be one of the worst statutes the world has ever seen. Well, why should I engage in hyperbole myself? It may be just a terrible statute, and you and I would
agree that no civilized community could really live with a statute
like that. But unless I as a judge, unelected, unrepresentative, have
a warrant in the Constitution, fairly applied, fairly interpreted, I will not strike it down because I regard it as outrageous.
Senator SIMON. And I would not want you to. But I guess I would want you to do what Justice Harlan referred to in that Poe v. Oilman case that I read just before—let me read it just once again.
"This liberty is not a series of isolated points, pricked out in terms of the taking of property," talking about the use of the word
"liberty" in the 14th amendment, "the freedom of speech, press
and religion, the right to keep and bear arms, the freedom from
unreasonable searches and seizures, and so on. It is a rational continuum which, broadly speaking, includes the freedom from all sub­stantial, arbitrary impositions and purposeless restraints."
Judge BORK. That, I think—that purpose, I think, can more use­fully be served—and I hate to bring this up again—by a reasonable
basis test under the equal protection clause, because if you get an
unreasonable restraint or a purposeless distinction, it is not going
to meet a reasonable basis test. And I suppose I should fill that out
by saying that I think the Court, using the reasonable basis test—
which Justice Stevens does, and maybe some others do—I think I
would come out just in about the same position that the Court is in
on such matters as racial discrimination, gender discrimination,
and so forth. I just regard it as a much more satisfactory methodology than this each group has its own tier of analysis kind of consti­tutional theory that we have now.
But I do not think the results would differ substantially. I cannot think of a Supreme Court gender discrimination case that would come out differently in my mind under a reasonable basis test. And I think that is a better constitutional methodology to accomplish what Justice Harlan was saying there than is a substantive due process methodology.
Senator SIMON. I thank you, Judge Bork, and Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
Judge, I know you will be pleased to know that is it for today. We have finished one round of questions from myself and all of my colleagues. Tomorrow, we will resume at 10 o'clock, and with a little bit of luck, we will be able to finish tomorrow. But again, why don't you and I confer. We will probably break around noon or one again tomorrow, and we will confer to see how late we go, if we have to go.
Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman, what will be the procedure to­morrow on time?
The CHAIRMAN. The procedure tomorrow, my view would be that since a number of Senators have indicated that they thought they were going to have substantial questions—I do not mean to imply there is anything new, I mean, to go back over material, or new material; I do not know—that we would stick to the half-hour. If Senators do not wish to use the whole half-hour, they don't have to; if they wish to use the half-hour, they can. Hopefully, that will allow all the questions to be asked at that time. But it will be the half-hour again.
Is that all right with you, Judge, the half-hour question period?
Judge BORK. Oh, yes, that is fine.
The CHAIRMAN. Fine. With that, the hearing is adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 o'clock.
The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order.
We welcome back Judge Bork. With a little bit of luck—let me be more precise. With a lot of luck, we can have you home tonight and not have to come back.
I would like to suggest how we are going to proceed the remain­der of the day. I am going to start the second round of questioning. We will use the same format, a half hour for each of my colleagues in order of those who wish to ask a second round, and I do not know about you, Judge, but every hour and a half or so I would like to take a break since you and I and most of us have to sit here, if that is all right with you.
Judge BORK. Sounds good to me, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. Okay. Then that is the way we will go if we can.
Judge, I would like to go back to questions that I started with you on Tuesday, and I suspect you are going to find that happening with all of us going back to where some of us left off. It is kind of hard to go bouncing back and forth like this, I realize so if there is anything you do not understand about my asking and you want to slow it down, just holler.
I asked you about the, quote, "dozens of cases" that were wrong, that the Supreme Court decisions were wrong, and you said in re­sponse to me that you would have to go back and start through the case books again to pick out what they were so we did not get to discuss really the dozens of cases that were wrong, and it is an area that is important because I think it ties into what I think you have sensed on both sides of the aisle here into this question about precedent and how binding precedent is, how important it is.
Many of my colleagues have expressed concern that decisions that we have come to accept may be upset. So I would like to begin this morning by talking about precedent.
(319)
Judge, you said when you testified before this committee, and I mentioned this before, back in 1982 that "a judge ought not over­turn prior decisions unless he thinks it is absolutely clear that the prior decision was wrong and perhaps pernicious."
Now, again, I am not trying to nail you to quotes but just the ideas. You said yesterday in your response to questions from Sena­tor Specter that the substantive due process clause which, I might add, is the place from where the general right of privacy has been de­rived that I like and you do not like too much, not that you do not like privacy but you do not like it being found in the 14th amend­ment; that you indicated that substantive due process was "perni­cious." You used that phrase again yesterday.
Based on your own standard about what you do when a case is pernicious, it seems to me that the entire line of privacy decisions would be in some jeopardy. It is through the right of privacy that the Supreme Court protected married couples in their decisions and found a "marital right to privacy."
It is through the right of privacy that the Court protected the right of a grandmother to live with her grandsons in spite of an ordinance saying that you had to be a nuclear family. It is through the right of privacy that the rights of a father to see his children have been protected.
What has been protected, in other words, are, at least from my perspective, important and fundamental liberties that, in my view, predate the Constitution. I have them because I exist, at least from my point of view.
Now, if the decisions recognizing these rights and liberties, some of the ones I mentioned, are as you put it, pernicious—and you did not say they were pernicious; you said using the due process clause was pernicious—if they are pernicious, then I have a problem.
It seems to me that the cases, some of which I mentioned—I did not mention the case names, but the subject matter in those case— then those cases are up for grabs. So what I am trying to get a sense of is putting your view of when a case is wrongly decided or pernicious then a Supreme Court Justice should overturn it and you are labeling the due process clause and finding the due process clause, within it a right to privacy, as pernicious.
Putting them together, and I am not trying to play with words, putting them together, it seems to me that you are—bound may be the wrong word, but at least would be inclined intellectually to overrule these decisions or similar decisions that will come up, and there will be similar decisions off all these issues, you might rule that the "right does not exist."
Could you comment on that generally?
Judge BORK. I would be glad to, Mr. Chairman.
The clause of the Constitution to which you refer, and I seem to have left my copy in the briefcase, says that no person shall be de­prived of life, liberty or property without due process of law.
It seems to me historically clear that that is a clause that pro­tects procedures. You are entitled to fair procedures before you are deprived of anything. Its only substantive content is that it is used to incorporate most of the Bill of Rights which originally applied only to the federal government, it is used to incorporate most of
the Bill of Rights against State governments with which I have no
quarrel.But there is yet a third meaning which is that judges decide
when they do not like a law that somehow due process has a substantive content other than incorporation by which they can make
law. The CHAIRMAN. If they begin to define what liberty means for them.
Judge BORK. That is right. Applying it against legislative action, and I think I mentioned yesterday, and I brought it because there
is a good discussion of it in this book by Professor David Currie, I
think the first use of substantive due process came in the Dred
Scott decision, a case in which a black slave claimed that he had
become free because he had entered into territory where the Missouri Compromise forbad slavery. Chief Justice Taney ruled against the black slave, and he said
this—this is the first use that I know of—he said an act of Congress which deprives a citizen of the United States of his liberty or
property—he is talking about the slave master—an act of Congress
which deprives a citizen of the United States of his liberty or property merely because he came himself or brought his property into a
particular territory of the United States and had committed no offense against the laws, could hardly be dignified with the name of
due process of law. What Taney did was decide that an act of Congress forbidding
slavery in certain territories was unconstitutional under the due
process clause. I just want to point that out because that indicates
that the due process clause when it is used substantively has every
capacity to be pernicious. I would like to go on with the cases you mentioned, if I may, Mr.
Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Please, yes. Judge BORK. We are using the word "pernicious" in two senses
here. When I said in my prior hearing which was not a prepared
statement, just response to a question, that a case should not be
overruled unless it was clearly wrong and perhaps pernicious, "pernicious" I meant there in the sense of capable of having dynamic
force, generative force, that would produce new wrong decisions. There are some cases that may have been decided on the wrong
rationale but that rationale has never been extended anyplace else,
and there is no particular point in overruling a case like that. It is
there and so forth. The CHAIRMAN. Well, some of the cases I mentioned, though, I think, for example, in the Franz case, although you were a circuit
court judge, but you were worried that that may be a pernicious
case because there you are extending a right of privacy to an area
that had not been extended before. Would that qualify as one of
those cases under the second definition of pernicious? Judge BORK. NO, I do not think so, Senator. The Franz case, my
entire concern was not to face the constitutional issue because I did
not think Congress had faced the issue before us. The issue before
us was the Congress' witness protection program, and as we mentioned the other day, in that a woman who was divorced but had
children remarried and remarried a criminal who testified for the
government and the government hid him from everybody, new name, new identity, et cetera, new location, and she went with him with her children, and the father of the children could not find them.
Now, it was not necessary it seemed to me to go right to the con­stitutional question because under Pennsylvania law, it looked as if the father had a right under State law to visit his children, and there was no evidence that Congress had thought about that prob­lem and decided to preempt or wipe out State law on the subject.
I wanted to remand for consideration of that question and in my opinion, I was trying to call the problem to the attention of Con­gress so that Congress could decide initially whether it wanted to wipe out those rights.
Then I would have faced the constitutional question if it had come back.
The CHAIRMAN. What did you mean—I do not have the language in front of me. I cannot find it, but I am trying to remember, "em­barking on a chartless sea"?
Judge BORK. Well, see, the father may have had constitutional rights, but if I recall the case correctly, was the majority using a substantive due process approach?
The CHAIRMAN. I believe so. Yes, I think so. Judge BORK. Well, as I said, I do not like substantive due process because I think it leaves judges free to legislate. The CHAIRMAN. That is the point I am trying to get to. Here is a case where the majority used substantive due process.
Judge BORK. Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. And it seems to me that to fall within the defini­tion, your second definition, or maybe that is the wrong way to phrase it, your second usage of the word "pernicious" which, as I understand what you said, you said, "A case is pernicious when, in fact, its progeny might continue the bad." It seems to me this is a perfect example of that.
Judge BORK. Well, just—I am sorry. Go ahead, Mr. Chairman. I have a bad habit of answering before somebody is finished ques­tioning. I am sorry.
The CHAIRMAN. That is all right. Sometimes it helps me because my questions are not all that good sometimes. So go ahead and answer what you think I am going to ask. I think that as I under­stand you, your criticism of the majority beyond the issue that the State—there are several points that you make.
Judge BORK. Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. One is you say, "Hey, look, let the state decide this first before we go jumping in." And then you say, "And by the way," which is totally appropriate, in a sense intellectually chastis­ing your fellow members on the court who are the majority, you kind of slap their hand and you say, "Now, look, you are embark­ing on a chartless sea here. You are using substantive due proc­ess." And again we are sounding like lawyers which we both are, but substantive due process means, to make sure we all understand it, that a court is saying, liberty means the following.
Judge BORK. Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. Or life means the following, pursuit of happi­ness. They are going in and making a value judgment as you would
say from your neutral principles article. Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. NOW, this is a place where the court did extend
substantive due process beyond where it had ever been extended
before, and you pointed out they were embarking on a chartless
sea.
It would seem to me that is one of those cases that are pernicious
by your definition because you said, "Look, if they are going to be
going out and extending this due process thing, then that is pernicious." Is that right?
Judge BORK. Yes. I did not decide because I did not think I had to decide since I thought the states and Congress should initially
decide it, that there was no constitutional right in that case. I did
not like the substantive due process approach because there is no
guidance from anything in the Constitution about that. I should say that the substantive due process approach has been
severely criticized by Hugo Black, Felix Frankfurter and a number
of justices on the Court because it is without guidance for judges. But in Franz I did not say there was no constitutional right. I
just said we did not have to reach it yet, and if we did reach it, we
should not reach it through substantive due process. The CHAIRMAN. I should also point out, as you well know, that distinguished jurists like Harlan, Jackson, Cardozo, Frankfurter,
Burger and Powell all at one time or another have used substantive due process as you know. Judge BORK. Or the concept of ordered liberty which is not quite
the same thing. The CHAIRMAN. Both of which you reject. Judge BORK. The concept of ordered liberty I do not know about.
That comes out of Palko v. Connecticut, and I have never really
made up my mind about it. The CHAIRMAN. NOW, let me move on here. Judge BORK. May I add something, Mr. Chairman. It just suddenly occurs to me. The CHAIRMAN. Please do. Judge BORK. We are talking about this line of cases, and you suggest some cases in which the result the Court reached is certainly
very appealing, including the Franz case. The result is appealing.
In that kind of case, where we are talking about a father's rights
to see his children. We are talking about a grandmother's rights to
live with her grandchildren and so forth, I have not approached
those. But I would certainly, and while I do not like substantive due
process, I would certainly as a judge do my utmost to see if there is
a legitimate constitutional ground to uphold that freedom. I think
that is a judge's duty. The CHAIRMAN. I do not doubt you would attempt to do that. What I doubt is, based on your writing and your cases, whether or
not your philosophy of the law and the integrity with which you
apply it, and I mean that sincerely, would allow you.
By the way, Judge, I have no doubt in my mind, none, that
whether it's Griswold or Franz that you personally would like to have a decision that said, "Hey, look, Connecticut should not be
able to tell a married couple or any couple whether or not they can
use birth control." I believe that. Judge BORK. Well, I am glad. That is all I was trying to make
clear. The CHAIRMAN. AS I said at the outset, the disagreement that
you and I have relates not to you as a man, not to your personal
views, but to your judicial philosophy, because I think you are a
man of integrity and you are applying a judicial philosophy with
which I think I have—just as you had strong disagreement with
the majority on the court on substantive due process, I have strong
disagreement with you and your dislike of it. Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. NOW, having said that, let me move along the
same lines to this notion that has come up in the past of core ideas
that people mention. Let me be more specific. Yesterday you indicated that although you did not like the generalized right of privacy or use of substantive due process, you time
and again pointed out that certain core ideas were protected and
they were protected in first amendment you pointed out, privacy.
First amendment, fourth amendment, fifth amendment, eighth
amendment. You went down the list. Now, what I would like to ask you is this. If Justices Harlan,
Powell, Frankfurter, Jackson, Cardozo had found a fundamental
right of privacy or a fundamental liberty to be protected under another specific amendment to the Constitution, there would not
have been any occasion to see that the Constitution also contains
the basic right of privacy. Obviously they could not find it in any single amendment. Therefore, my question is putting aside all the specific amendments you
have mentioned either now or during the past several days do you
believe that the Constitution recognizes a marital right to privacy? Judge BORK. A marital right to privacy? I do not know. It may
well. I have seen arguments to that effect, but I have never investigated that. It is certainly one that I entirely agree with. I mean, I
agree with the concept, and I think it is very important that it be
maintained. But I have never worked on a constitutional argument in that
area. The CHAIRMAN. AS you know, in Griswold, for example, both the
concurrent opinion and the lead opinion uses and refers to a marital right of privacy. Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. And it seems to me, Judge, that you can't find
that marital right to privacy in the first, the fourth, the fifth, the
eighth amendments. The only place you can find it, that anybody
has been able to find it, is either in the ninth and/or in the 14th
amendment, and both of which either through substantive due
process or through the ninth amendment, you reject—"reject" may
be the wrong word—you are very leery of the use of the ninth
amendment at all as you have outlined for us, and you don't like
substantive due process.
So quite frankly, Judge, I don't see how you can find—you, and
by your theory, a marital right to privacy.
Judge BORK. I have two answers to that. Let me just clear up the ninth amendment business. If somebody shows me historical evi­dence of what they meant by the ninth amendment, I have no problem using it. I just don't know the historical evidence.
You mentioned a book. I have not read it.
The CHAIRMAN. I know, but at some point, because I do not want to take the time of the hearing, at some point I really would like to know fully and sit down with you. It would be an education for me, and maybe I could even show you something on the ninth amend­ment.
Judge BORK. All right. As to the marital right of privacy, I think it is essential to a civilized society. I do not know of any state, in­cluding Connecticut, that has ever tried to interfere with it because even the law in Connecticut was never used—nobody ever went in an arrested a married couple for using contraceptives or even threatened it, and I do not think it could be enforced given the fourth amendment and given the lack of enforcement.
So I don't know offhand—I cannot construct just sitting here a constitutional argument. Maybe I could if I spend a few days at it, but I don't think it is a live issue because no state has ever tried to enforce such a law.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, as I said earlier, Judge, we are going to see a lot of things start to come up in the law that we are going to have to face that are going to relate to marital rights to privacy, just the way technology is changing and we are going to have ev­erything from legislation I predict to you in the next 20 years on everything from test tube babies to cloning to
Judge BORK. I think we are, and I do not know what the answer to that is because I have never thought about it, but no state has ever tried to stop married couples from using contraceptives.
The CHAIRMAN. I am not just talking about contraceptives.
Judge BORK. I know.
The CHAIRMAN. I was talking about the broad right or marital right to privacy. Now, let me move on because I only have 10 min­utes left.
I would like to move to another area where your publicly stated views would affect what I consider to be strongly established Su­preme Court precedent. It does not necessarily mean you would overturn them, but they conflict.
Judge, you explained that you no longer hold to some of the views you expressed in an 1971 article in the Indiana Law Jour­nal—by the way, that is probably the most purchased law journal in America now. I mean, they are probably going back and making reprints of that like they never have.
Judge BORK. I wish I had kept the copyright, Senator.
The CHAIRMAN. In particular, you said that you no longer agree with some of what you said about the first amendment in that arti­cle, and I believe you said that you first began to move away from these views in 1973 when you were at your confirmation hearings as Solicitor General.
Judge BORK. Publicly. The CHAIRMAN. In a 1971 article you drew a bright line you said that only speech protected was explicitly political speech, and you
have said at some length yesterday that you now think that that
bright line was wrong.
But it seems to me that as of 1979 and 1985, you had drawn a
new line, not as bright, but a new line. Your new line, it seems to
me, by some of the testimony yesterday and what I have read,
seems to me would protect more speech than your old line did but not nearly as much as the currently Supreme Court does.
In your 1979 speech at Michigan, you explained your view that political speech is at the core of the first amendment, and you
spoke to that yesterday, and you went on to say, and I quote, and
again I do not want to hold you to a specific quote but it is the idea that is expressed.
If you just let me go through my thing, you might be able to ex­plain it here. You said, "But there is no occasion on this rationale
to throw constitutional protection around forms of expression that
do not directly feed the democratic process. It is sometimes said
that works of art or indeed any form of expression are capable of
influencing attitudes, but in these indirect and relatively remote
relationships to the political process, verbal or visual expression
does not differ at all from other human activities such as sports or
business which are also capable of affecting political attitudes, but are not on that account immune from regulation."
In a 1985 interview with the California Lawyer, you told the interviewer about an argument with Professor Harry Kalven. You
said Professor Kalven argued that the first amendment should be
interpreted by, and I quote, "starting with political speech and
moving all the way out to paintings, statutes, dancing and so forth. Anything that is expressive is protected." That was Kalven.
This was the view, you said, of Professor Kalven with whom you had said you disagreed. You went onto tell the interviewer, and I
quote, "that it seems to me that to be able to level a generality
that goes well beyond what the framers intended, I doubt if they intended to protect some forms of dancing from regulation."
Now, as I understand it, that meant that you believed that the first amendment only protected speech that related to politics or to
the political process. It did not have to be speech explicitly discussing politics. It did not have to say it was dealing with politics, but it had to be related to the political process.
That was not your 1971 view but it was your 1979 and 1985 views. That new line, it seems to me, you have drawn. Now, that
view, quite frankly, troubles me. All sorts of artistic speech—paintings, hanging a nude in a gallery or your home of some great
artist, dancing, the Joffrey Ballet or any other ballet that some are
more expressive than others and in some conservatives their attire
somehow is viewed as being provocative—have nothing to do with politics, that is, paintings and dancing.
But they are still, in my view, very important and I believe pro­tected by the first amendment. I do not believe that State legislatures or any government body should be able to sensor or suppress
expressions just because it is unrelated to expression of a political
notion.
I am not talking about obscene expression. I am talking about
nonpolitical expression like, as I said, the American Ballet Company, Reuben's nudes, or dancing on American Bandstand.
Now, under your 1985 theory, Judge, the government, as I see it, a government, a county council, city council, State, could sensor this nonpolitical speech. Is that still your view and do I have that correct?
Judge BORK. When I said some forms of dancing, I had in mind what I regarded as a peculiarly odd enterprise the Supreme Court once engaged in. I forget which way they came out. But they had a lot of trouble with a question of whether a community could ban dancing in the nude in a bar, and that struck me as not something they should have had a lot trouble with.
I think they went to the amendment allowing states to control liquor to finally bar the nude dancing. The CHAIRMAN. Well, let us stick with that for a minute. I am trying to get at your political—there has to be a political nexus.
Judge BORK. NO, I do not think it is a political nexus. I said that there are all kinds of forms of—well, there are two lines I want point out. There are all kinds of forms of expression, discourse, lit­erature that seriously affect the way we view our society and the way we view ourselves and so forth, and I am willing to protect that.
As a theoretical matter, I could draw a different line. There is now a vast corpus of first amendment decisions, and I accept those decisions as law, and I am not troubled by them. If I wanted to start over again and say what line would I draw, I do not know. I do not know.
The CHAIRMAN. Gee, Judge, in 1985 though you
Judge BORK. NO, no, I said if I was starting over again I might sit down and draw a line that did not cover some things that are now covered. But there is a body of law now that covers those things. It does not disturb me and I have no desire to disturb that body of law.
The CHAIRMAN. HOW about the case, for example, where an Afri­can dance troupe is going through and the women who do the Afri­can tribal dances that they are having on this tour are topless be­cause they do not wear anything.
I mean could the county council of Newcastle County ban them?
Judge BORK. I think on the current law it could not, and I would not attempt to The CHAIRMAN. But under your view, could they? Judge BORK. If I were going back to redraw a theoretical line, I
do not know where I would draw it. I would probably would not ban that because that is also a cultural display, and it does affect our view of things, and I probably would not ban that.
But I have not gone back to redraw a theoretical line. It seems to me the current body of doctrine, the current body of law which is well-settled protects that, and I certainly have no desire to go run­ning around trying to upset settled bodies of law which are not, to say the least, pernicious. Those decisions are not pernicious.
You may argue and say that, well, a different line could have been drawn. I do not know if it could or not, but those are cases which I would certainly not classify as pernicious. I would not clas­sify them as clearly wrong, and I would accept that line of first amendment cases gladly, not grudgingly, gladly.
If I were being a theoretician again and starting from scratch with the first amendment, I would struggle long and hard to find out where line should be and currently I do not know what I would do as a theoretician because I have not revisited the area for some time, but as a judge
The CHAIRMAN. In 1985 you did, Judge.
Judge BORK. I did not revisit it. I was talking about what I had said before. The CHAIRMAN. Oh. Judge BORK. But as a judge, I accept those decisions and have. If
you look at my first amendment decisions, they are quite-when I use the word "liberal", I am not talking about political inclinations but they are liberal constructions of the first amendment.
The CHAIRMAN. Only on libel as I read them, but I won't get into that.
Judge BORK. Well, libel is not different from other things.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, it is. It is. As you know, we used to teach it—at any rate, because my time is up, let me conclude by suggest­ing that in 1984 your letter to the ABA that you have spoken to, as I read that letter, you still focused on the relationship to the politi­cal process of speech and after you started off by saying that the first amendment applies to more than just speech, that is, quote, "explicitly political" you went on to say, and I quote, "I have long since concluded that many other forms of discourse such as moral and scientific debate are central to democratic government and de­serve protection. I continue to think that obscenity and pornogra­phy do not fit this rationale."
In 1984, you did not decide that moral and scientific speech should be protected for its own sake. Instead you said it should be protected because you had decided that it fit your rationale for pro­tection.
Do you understand what I am driving at here?
Judge BORK. Sure, Senator, I do, but that is a letter to the editor in which I decided not to try to spell out in detail my views on the first amendment, and I said, as you just quoted, I have decided that other—did I say many other forms of discourse?
The CHAIRMAN. Yes.
Judge BORK. Many other forms of discourse such as, and I men­tioned moral and scientific speech. That means that there are other categories as well, and I was not trying to spell out a juris­prudence of the first amendment in detail in a letter to the editor.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, the last point. You did an interview with Worldnet. In June of 1987, you did an interview with Worldnet where you still focused on whether speech relates to the political process.
You said there that a spectrum of speech with political speech at the core, excuse me. You said there was a spectrum of speech with political speech at the core. You explain the political speech was speech about public affairs and public officials.
You went on to say the protection spread out from the core to scientific speech into fiction and so forth, but then you went back and stressed that some speech had no relationship to politics, and you said that that speech has no protection.
In your words, and I quote, "There comes a point at which speech no longer has any relation to these processes," and there you refer to the political processes, and as mentioned above, again quoting, "when it reaches that level, speech is really no different from any other form of human activity which produces self-gratifi­cation.
Judge, it seems to me to be far from where you started.
Judge BORK. Well, let me read that again, please, Mr. Chairman, because I think I said something that I did not hear. Nobody, I think, doubts that the core of the first amendment is political speech. Harry Kalven did not doubt it and Alexander Meicklejohn did not doubt it.
The New York Times v. Sullivan case, which threw protections around people from libel actions, focused upon public officials, public figures and so forth because they are the subject of politics and comment.
Everybody, including the Supreme Court, starts from the politi­cal speech core, and that is the most strongly protected. But let me read what I did say in this thing. The German professor, they were in, I forget, in Hamburg or someplace, asked me something, and I said, "I cannot tell you much more than that there is a spectrum of, I think, political speech. Speech about public affairs and public officials is the core of the amendment. Protection is going to spread out from there as I say in the moral speech and the scientific speech into fiction and so forth."
That statement explicitly contemplates protection for fiction and so forth. Whatever that is. Then I said there comes a point, which you quoted, where it is no longer related to these.
I think when you get the speech or print which is purely for sexual gratification, pornography or obscenity, I fail to see its con­nection to anything.
The CHAIRMAN. But how about just speech for speech sake that is not pornographic but that people do not like it. It has no relation­ship to the political process?
Judge BORK. Well, I just said that fiction and so forth is protect­ed. I said that in this interview you quote.
The CHAIRMAN. Can fiction reach a point where it is no different from any other form of human activity and produces only self-gratification?
Judge BORK. Produces only self-gratification? I think about the only form of fiction that does not affect ideas and attitudes or af­fects them in ways that are not particularly healthy is obscenity or pornography. I use the terms interchangeably. I think I am using them interchangeably.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, my time is up. I will come back again. Thank you, Judge. I yield to the ranking member, Senator Thur­mond.
Senator THURMOND. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Judge Bork, over the past two days you have made comments on the equal protection clause of the 14th amendment. Some have criticized you for what they understand to be your position. This morning I would like to explore your understanding and analysis of the 14th amendment.
The 14th amendment reads, "Nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws."
Now, let us start with the basics. The language says, "No State shall deny equal protection to any person." Does that mean every person in the State must be treated the same by every law?
Judge BORK. It means every person in the State must be treated the same unless there is a valid basis for making a distinction. Ob­viously to take the extreme example, we do not treat burglars and honest people the same way. We make a strong distinction between those two groups, and that is a valid distinction.
Now, when we come down to other groups, to other people, the question is is the distinction made between them by a law valid? I can go on about that, Senator, but if you want to ask a further question in this area, I can wait for that.
Senator THURMOND. Then naturally states draw distinctions among its citizens. The Court must then decide if the distinctions drawn by the states are reasonable under the 14th amendment. How does the Court do that? What standard is currently used in race cases, strict scrutiny; in gender cases, heightened scrutiny; all other cases, rational basis?
Judge BORK. NO, I hope not, Senator. The Supreme Court is a little bit divided on this issue. There are two schools of thought up there. One is that you identify a group and then decide what level of scrutiny you will give to any law that disadvantages that group in some way, and I think that is a little paradoxical given the lan­guage of the amendment which you have quoted which means it applies to all persons so that I would think that no group could be excluded from the protection of the amendment as a group.
What the equal protection clause requires is that people who are similarly situated be treated equally, and in the case of race, there is no valid basis for a distinction, and so the 14th amendment re­quires equality absolutely.
In the case of gender, there are only a few bases of distinction, and I got into this topic with Senator DeConcini yesterday. I men­tioned some of the extreme cases, but I think those are almost the only cases in which a distinction between the sexes would be allow­able.
For example, gender is irrelevant to your ability to work as a lawyer or as a doctor or anything else. I agree completely with the Supreme Court case of Reed v. Reed, which said that a State stat­ute saying that if there is a man and a woman in the family, the one who is preferred, who becomes the administrator of an estate, must be the man. That is an irrational distinction and it was struck down, and it should have been.
The fact is a reasonable basis approach which rejects artificial distinctions and discriminations would arrive at all of the same re­sults, I think, or virtually all of the same results that a majority of the Supreme Court has arrived at using a group approach and an intermediate level of scrutiny approach. There is really no differ­ence in anything except the methodology, but women are covered, every person is covered by the qual protection clause.
I am glad to have a chance to go into this because people seem to think that a reasonable basis test is a very weak protection. It is not. It has become a weak protection in economic areas because the Court has found distinctions there to be allowable that we do not allow elsewhere. But it is not a weak protection in areas of race, gender, and so forth.
Let me point out what the Supreme Court has done in the past in this area because these are cases I disagree with. I disagree with the Supreme Court in these cases. In Kotch v. Board of River Port Pilot Commissioners—this is my Indiana article, by the way, on page 12. The Court decided that a State could grant pilots' licenses, river boat pilots' licenses, only to persons who were related by blood to existing pilots, and they could deny licenses to persons oth­erwise as well or better qualified. The Supreme Court upheld that ridiculous distinction back then, not too long ago. That seems to me a distinction that would fail on a reasonable basis test.
Then in Goesaert v. Cleary, a case from 1948, the Court said that a State could refuse to license women as bartenders unless they are the wives or daughters of male owners of licensed liquor establish­ments. That was upheld in Goesaert v. Cleary. That, too, is a ridicu­lous distinction and would fail under the reasonable basis test. And so forth.
The reasonable basis test would give us all of the protections, maybe more than you would get by identifying particular groups and deciding which level of scrutiny we get. I have just been shown Justice Stevens' remark in City of Cleburne which was a distinction about retarded children. It says, "In every equal protection case"— this is Justice Stevens—"we have to ask certain basic questions. What class is harmed by the legislation, and has it been subjected to a tradition of disfavor by our laws? What is the public purpose that is being served by the law? What is the characteristic of the disadvantaged class that justifies the disparate treatment? In most cases, the answers to these questions will tell us whether the stat­ute has a rational basis. The answers will result in the virtually automatic invalidation of racial classification and in the validation of most economic classifications, but they will provide differing re­sults in cases involving classifications based on alienage, gender, or illegitimacy. But that is not because we apply an intermediate standard of review in those cases; rather, it is because the charac­teristics of these groups are sometimes relevant and sometimes ir­relevant to a valid public purpose, or more specifically, to the pur­pose that the challenged law is purportedly intended to serve."
I think it is important to say that because I think there has been a misimpression that the reasonable basis test is a weak test. It is weak only in the area of economic distinctions. It is not weak in the area of race or gender or other persons.
Senator THURMOND. YOU may have covered this next question, but I am going to ask it and you can decline if you feel you have covered it.
You have been accused of two errors in your analysis. First, you were charged with using a different standard for women; that is, gender cases. Is it not true that the current Court standard for gender cases is different than race cases?
Judge BORK. Well, the reasonable basis test is probably applied
in both. It is just that the difference between races is irrelevant,
and, therefore, distinctions may not be made. In discussing this
with Senator DeConcini, I mentioned that, for example, things that
you would not allow in a race case, you might allow, you would
allow in a gender case; such as different toilet facilities, difference
about going into combat and so forth. Now, that makes my point. There are very few areas in which a
distinction between men and women is allowable, and those are
among the few. But that distinction would not be allowable on the
basis of race. Senator THURMOND. The next question I have is that, at any
rate, you are accused of having a lower standard for gender and
race cases than is currently employed. Judge BORK. That is not the case. Senator THURMOND. I think you have covered the situation. Judge BORK. I think so. Senator THURMOND. NOW, is it not correct to say that analysis
under the 14th amendment, while certainly involving important
issues, really turns on how much deference the Court gives to State
legislatures to elected officials.? The higher the regard for elected
officials, the more deference a judge is likely to allow. Judge BORK. Well, I suppose it depends on whether you allow
deference or not. I would think that it is not a question so much of
deference as to whether the State, if it makes a distinction in its
laws, states a reasonable reason for the distinction that is a valid
reason. I do not think it is a question of deference, exactly; it is a
question of listening to what they have to say and deciding whether what they have to say makes sense. Senator THURMOND. NOW, let us explore one other issue. Over
the past several decades, the 14th amendment has been used by the
Court to inject its policy objectives into law. While some may like
the particular results of that analysis today, is it the thrust of your
objection that without a principle analysis the tables can be turned
on any issue at the whim of the Court, so that some who like a
free-flowing equal protection analysis today may regret it tomorrow? Judge BORK. Oh, that is quite true, Senator Thurmond. I made
the same point just a minute ago, that the substantive due process
approach, which is equivalent in its legislative capacity by judges,
to a free form equal protection analysis is capable, as it was in
Dred Scott v. Sanford, of producing horrible results, just as it is capable of producing what some would regard enlightened results. When you hand this power to judges, if you allow this power to
judges, you have no guarantee that the judges will always produce
what we or any number of us would like. Judges, once they begin
to put their personal preferences into law, may come up with
dreadful results, as they did in Dred Scott and as they did in the
early 1930s when they were striking down reform legislation. Let me say something about why I prefer a reasonable basis
analysis to a group-by-group analysis. It is not just that the language of the amendment refers to "any person," therefore all persons. It is that if one thing is clear about the 14th amendment, it is
that the framers of that amendment, the people who ratified it, had no intention of wiping out distinctions between men and
women that we would now regard as very discriminatory. They went ahead and did it.
So if you say group by group are women included or not, you have a hard time, as a matter of the intention of the people who
passed that, of saying women as a group are included. But we have
been using a reasonable basis test as a means for implementing the
broad language of the equal protection clause now for all of this century. I think it makes more sense in this sense.
I said in this case of Oilman y. Evans that we talked about, that the Constitution evolves as society changes. I said that about the
first amendment and its relation to libel actions, but it is also true
here. Distinctions that we made between genders in the 19th century and which we assumed to be reasonable then, or the society assumed to be reasonable then, no longer seem to anybody to be reasonable. And those distinctions are beginning to fall. I think they
are beginning to fall because the place of women in society has
evolved rapidly and changed rapidly, and now we see only a few
distinctions that may reasonably and rationally be made between
men and women. And I have mentioned two. Some people say
those are extreme cases, and they certainly are. Only extreme
cases in this area can be justified. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, you were asked yesterday whether your approach to women's rights would afford women constitutional protection against invidious discrimination. I think you
have already very eloquently explained your reasoning. Your approach, as I understand it, would afford equal protection to all per­sons under the 14th amendment.
Generally, your approach is more in line with Justice John Paul Stevens' rationale. Justice Stevens has written, "A reasonable basis
test would not lead to results very different from those under the
Court's current analysis. For example, one need not employ a complex intermediate scrutiny test to determine whether a particular
gender classification is reasonable. Although all-male combat units
may be reasonable, disabilities based on outmoded stereotypes are not."
The Supreme Court's decision in Rostiker v. Goldberg upholding the all-male draft registration appears to confirm this conclusion.
Do you think your approach would protect women's right as adequately as they are protected now? And would you explain your answer.
Judge BORK. Senator, I do think they would be protected as ade­quately as they are now, and I explained my answer by much of
what I have just said; that rational distinctions cannot be made between men and women, usually, except on physical strength or
something of that sort, which is the combat example. It is rational
to have all-male combat troops. But in the ordinary occupations of
life and in social intercourse and so forth and so on, there is no rational distinction between men and women.
I think the Supreme Court has about arrived at that decision using intermediate scrutiny and so forth. I arrive at it, as Justice John Paul Stevens does, using a reasonable basis test. Is there a
reasonable basis for a distinction?
86-974 0 - 89 - 13
Most of the distinctions that survive in the law are old ones
made long ago which no longer seem to reasonable to us. They are
not reasonable. In a different state of culture, in a different state of
society, they may have seemed reasonable. They are not now. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, I think there may be some con­fusion as to your position on first amendment rights. For example,
in a case of written materials that fall within a State's classification of pornographic, the question is whether that State's classification meets the Supreme Court standard of pornography. If the State's classification and the Supreme Court's are in
accord, then the individuals concerned are not entitled to judicial
intervention. However, I think confusion arises because of the
characterization to protect judicial intervention. I think some
people view this characterization as a Court declining to make a
judgment on whether protections of the first amendment extend to
certain materials. I think what you are saying is the Supreme Court or lower court
must review the material itself and then make the determination
whether the materials are, in fact, pornographic; and if they are
pornographic, they do not get first amendment protection. If they
are not pornographic, they may be entitled to first amendment protection. Would you again please clarify your position on this subject? Judge BORK. Yes. The Supreme Court has repeatedly said that
there are some categories of speech—a very few—which are simply
outside first amendment protection. They have mentioned obscenity; they have mentioned fighting words, words that are likely to
start a fight; and a few others. Now, in order to make sure that the first amendment is being
complied with, when a State punishes words as obscenity or as
fighting words or any other category, the Supreme Court has to
look, or some court has to look and say, Did the State correctly
classify those words as obscenity or as fighting words under the
constitutional standard? If the State did not, then the Supreme
Court should reverse the conviction and say you may not punish
that speech. But it is for the Supreme Court to define what is obscenity and
the Supreme Court to define what is fighting words, and to ask in
each case, Did the State correctly act against those words, or did it
incorrectly act against those words? I trust I make myself clear on this point, but I am not sure. All I
am saying is that the ultimate control of the definitions and categories of words must be in the Supreme Court, not in the State, if
the first amendment is to be upheld. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, would you again explain your theory of the relationship between the Brandenburg test and Justice Holmes' theory of the clear and present danger test? Judge BORK. Well, the views I expressed in 1971—it was a bad
year. The views I expressed in 1971 and Justice Holmes' clear and
present test, I think that the Brandenburg case falls somewhere in
between that.
Now, let me explain. I think that I have been getting criticism
first because I never change my mind; now I am being criticized
because I change my mind. And I want to explain where I stand
about this so that I can be criticized on the right grounds. There is only one difference between what I said about advocacy
of law violation and the Brandenburg position. I am not talking
about here somebody advocating violating the law in order to test
its constitutionality. I am not talking about the Martin Luther
King case; because if you advocate the violation of law in order to
test its constitutionality, certainly the speech is protected if the
law is unconstitutional. It may well be protected if the law is unconstitutional. I do not know where the law stands on that right
now. I am talking about the advocacy of law violation which is not related to a claim of unconstitutionality in any way. I had really said, I did say that I thought theoretically the advocacy of law violation in such circumstances could have been punished under the first amendment. What Brandenburg did was say
there must be a closer nexus between the advocacy and the lawless
action. It said the advocacy of law violation must be in circumstances where there is the likelihood of imminent lawless action.
So it added one factor to what I said, the closeness of the danger. Now, I have not changed my mind about what I said upon this
subject. I could have accepted a first amendment law that developed the way I thought in 1971 it ought to have from the beginning. I could accept that. The law did not develop that way. It developed to require a
closer nexus between the advocacy and the violent action or the
lawless action, imminent lawless action. That is a change in the
thing, but it does not involve me changing my mind at all. I can
accept either position.I accept the fact that the Supreme Court has added an additional
safeguard to the position that I took in 1971 for speech advocating
lawlessness. As an academic, I thought that was not theoretically
justified. As a judge, I accept it, and that is all there is to that. I think you will see that I have no trouble with a strong reading
of the first amendment from my court of appeals record, which is
more relevant, I think, than speculations in the past. In any event, there is not that much difference between my past
position and the decision inBrandenburg.Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, yesterday, in response to a
question, you indicated that there are some rights that are not enumerated in the Constitution, but are recognized because of the
structure of the Constitution and government. Could you give us an example of one of these. Judge BORK. Well, the right to travel, I think, Senator, was first
derived—I have not re-read the case, recently, but I remember, it is
in Crandall y. Nevada, a couple of years before the 14th amendment was ratified.
Nevada was taxing people a dollar every time they left the State,
and the Supreme Court struck down that tax in saying there was a
right to travel without hindrance by the State, and it did so on
structural reasoning about the nature of the Federal Union, and
how you have to travel, and so forth.
But the oldest example of structural reasoning in the law—I do
not know if it is the oldest, but the best—is Chief Justice John Marshall's opinion in McCulloch v. Maryland, where entirely on
structural grounds, he first establishes the right of the United
States to create a national bank, the Bank of the United States,
and then establishes that that bank must be free from State taxation of its commercial instruments. An entirely structural argu­ment, entirely sound argument.
Senator THURMOND. Thank you very much. My time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Kennedy. Senator KENNEDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, the framers of the Constitution recognized the unchecked powers of the executive branch of government as perhaps
the greatest threat to liberty. That is what the fight for independence was all about. They did not want another King George, and they certainly did not want an all-powerful President.
One of the ways in which the Constitution protects our freedom is by dividing the powers of government among the three
branches—the President, the Congress, and the Courts—and ensuring that each branch is in a position to check any abuses by the others. That is what the checks and balances are all about.
First, I would like to talk about the War Powers Act. When the Congress passed that legislation in 1973, a very broad bipartisan
majority of the House and Senate expressed the view, in the wake of Vietnam, that no President should ever again be able to lead the country into an undeclared war without the approval of Congress.
Judge Bork, that was passed over President Nixon's veto by a vote of 75 to 18 in the Senate of the United States.
Isn't it true, that in an article in "The Wall Street Journal," in 1978, you stated that the War Powers Act was—and I quote— "probably unconstitutional, and certainly unworkable?"
Since then, have you expressed any different view about the War Powers Act? Judge BORK. I do not know if I have, Senator, but I think I can clarify that, not that I am going to take it back. I am just going to clarify it.
That was a sentence leading into a different topic, and I do not recall whether I have ever made any extensive analysis of the War Powers Act.
But there are certainly problems with workability, and I do not today recall all the details, but a lot of Presidents, and so forth, have complained about aspects of it.
I remember when President Ford—I think it was the Mayaguez episode—and in order to notify the Speaker of the House he had to
call him where he was, in China, flying on a Chinese airliner, to
tell him about a military action. It seemed a little odd, but I do not
really care about that. Those are policy questions, and they are not for me.
When I say it was probably unconstitutional, that is a very com­plex act, and let me say, I think the consultation requirements probably seem constitutional to me. The notice requirement seems constitutional. But you know, that act, as I recall, contains a legis­lative veto. I may be wrong, but I think it contains a legislative veto, which, at the time, I thought was probably unconstitutional, and the Supreme Court in the Chadha case has since said that it is unconstitutional.
So that, I do not think, to that degree mine was a bad prediction. If I had to construe the statute—and I do not know that I ever will
because there are problems with justiciability, and I do not know the answer to the justiciability problems but they are there.
I would construe it in order to save its constitutionality as any judge should. There is one other area of possible problems with the
act, and that is this. The major questions of war, or peace, or questions affecting that, are most certainly for the Congress. Only Con­gress can declare war.
In fact the Congress need not give the President a single soldier. There is no constitutional requirement that it do so. But at the other end of the spectrum, tactical decisions in the
field seem to me to be for the Commander in Chief, and, for example, I would—to take the extreme case—I would have very much
doubted that during the Battle of the Bulge, Congress could have
ordered the President to surrender the airborne troops at Bastonne rather than continuing the battle.
Now there is a vasi spectrum between the ultimate strategic question of war or peace and tactical decisions in the field, and it
may be that some constructions of the War Powers Act might get
Congress into clearly tactical decisions, but I am not sure about that. I have not looked at that for a long time.
Senator KENNEDY. Of course your article in The Wall Street Journal does not relate to the legislative veto and there are many other provisions in the War Powers Act itself.
In 1971, you suggested that it was unconstitutional for Congress to stop the President from invading Cambodia. We all agree that
the President is the Commander in Chief, and the Congress cannot
manage and should not manage military tactics. That was very
clear during the hearings, and during the debate on the War
Powers Act. We cannot run a war, but we ought to be able to stop
a war. That is just common sense in a democracy, and the American people have learned, with good reason, to be skeptical of presi­dential wars.
We all know what happened in Vietnam, and the same concerns were there when President Reagan sent the troops into Lebanon,
and the American people are obviously concerned today in regard to our policy in Nicaragua as well as the Persian Gulf.
So the War Powers Act simply insures that the President has the support of Congress and the country for these sorts of military actions, but you say the Congress does not have any such power in
this absolutely vital area of war and peace. You say it is unconstitutional and you say it is unworkable.
Judge BORK. Senator, I just said precisely the opposite. I just said
the question of war or peace is entirely for Congress. Only Congress can declare war.
As far as Vietnam is concerned, Congress could have cut off the
funds and ended that war, whenever. That would have been entirely constitutional.
My only question was a question of tactics within a war.
Senator KENNEDY. Let's go to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act which was passed in the Congress in 1978 by 95 to 1, to
correct some of the abuses by the FBI and the Central Intelligence
Agency during the Nixon administration.
It requires that a warrant be obtained from a special federal
court before electronics surveillance can be conducted on United
States citizens in the course of a national security investigation. It
contained an exception for a limited number of top-secret wiretaps by the President.
In June 1978, you testified before the House Judiciary Commit­tee, and I quote:
The plan of bringing the Judiciary, a warrant requirement, and a criminal viola­tion standard into the field of foreign intelligence is, when analyzed, a thoroughly bad idea, and almost certainly unconstitutional as well. The law is very probably a violation of article II and III.
Since your testimony before the House Committee, have you expressed a different view regarding that?
Judge BORK. I do not recall that I have, Senator, but let me ex­plain that view.
We are talking now about electronic surveillance of people we have good reason to believe are agents of a foreign power. Every
President since Franklin Roosevelt has claimed the power to
engage in electronic surveillance of foreign agents without a court warrant. Every President has claimed it.
In addition to that, the United States has won two court cases at the court of appeals level. In the fifth circuit, the court of appeals
upheld a warrantless electronic surveillance against a foreign power.
In the third circuit, the court sitting, en bane—that is the full court, not just three judges—the court sitting, en bane, said the
President had the constitutional power to engage in electronic sur­veillance of a foreign agent without a warrant.
When I was Solicitor General, we had the Butenko case which in­volved a Soviet KGB agent who was caught through electronic surveillance without a warrant, and I knew we had won this case in two lower courts, that the President's power included that.
So when Butenko—I think it was called Ivanov by that time— when he petitioned for certiorari, having lost in the lower court, I
told the Supreme Court that I had no objection to the Court taking
the case because I wanted to get a Supreme Court ruling on the
President's power to conduct electronic surveillance against foreign agents without warrants.
We had been winning those cases in the courts, and that is why I thought it was the prerogative that every President since Franklin Roosevelt had claimed. That is the article II point, Senator.
The article III point is this. Article III requires that the judicial power be used where there is a case, or a controversy. In the ordi­nary warrant case, you certainly have the potential for a case or a controversy because the judge or a magistrate issues a warrant.
If any arrest, or anything goes wrong, or damage occurs in the
execution of that warrant, that warrant may be challenged in
court.
What troubled me about this new warrant procedure was that it
is a secret court. There is no challenge to challenge the procedure
unless somebody is arrested, which may not be the case because
you are just surveilling for intelligence purposes—there is no challenge to the procedure and you have got a body of secret law grow­ing up, that nobody knows about except the judges on the court and the Government people who go to talk to that court.
That worried me, under Article III of the Constitution. I was not sure that was a judicial function.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, the fact is, under the Constitution Con­gress must have the power to limit surveillance of U.S. citizens. The fact is we have had that on the law books now for a number of years.
Judge William Webster, who is now the Director of the CIA, also the former Director of the FBI, when he was questioned about whether he believed it was any hindrance in terms of trying to follow or surveil foreign agents, subversives, those that might be treasonous to the United States, said that the act—and I quote— "worked beautifully."
Obviously that particular law is an important safeguard now. I think of the administration's opposition to the sanctuary move­ment for refugees from El Salvador—we are talking about Ameri­can citizens now. We certainly do not want Ed Meese running around with unlimited power to put wiretaps on churches.
You seem to feel that the law infringes on the national security power of the President, but the Congress did not think the Presi­dent has any inherent power to violate the privacy of American citizens in the name of national security, and I do not think that the President has any such power
Judge BORK. I quite agree with you, Senator. The President has no power just to violate the privacy of American citizens.
Senator KENNEDY. Under the guise of
Judge BORK. Well, under the guise, that is right. All I was saying is that two courts of appeals had held that he did have the power to conduct electronic surveillance of foreign agents. He may not. All I know is that two courts of appeals held it. I do not know if he does, or not, but that was the way the law stood at the time I was saying that.
Senator KENNEDY. Let's talk about another area. That is the role of special prosecutors.
Many of us in Congress and the country are troubled by charges in the Iran-Contra scandal that officials in the executive branch broke the law and ignored statutes enacted by the Congress pro­hibiting U.S. military aid to the contras in Nicaragua. It seems fundamental to the rule of law, that the President must obey the same laws that bind every other American. No President, no offi­cial, is above the law.
And after the unsatisfactory experience with Watergate, particu­larly your firing of Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox, Congress en­acted a law so that special prosecutors could be appointed by the courts, with their independence guaranteed.
In November 1973, a few weeks after you fired Mr. Cox, you tes­tified,
The question is whether congressional legislation appointing a special prosecutor outside the executive branch, or empowering the courts to do so, would be constitu­tionally valid, and whether it provides significant advantages that make it worth taking a constitutionally risky course.
I am persuaded that such a course would almost certainly not be valid, and would, in any event, pose more problems than it would solve.
Would you tell the committee whether you have ever publicly ex­pressed a different view regarding the constitutionality of the spe­cial prosecutor legislation.
Judge BORK. I publicly
Senator THURMOND. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make this point. That is a question that may come before the Supreme Court, and I would caution the witness to be careful of what he says on that point.
Judge BORK. I was just going to repeat what I said back in 1973, because for one thing—and I think those proposals were very dif­ferent statutes than the one that is now in effect. They contemplat­ed judicial appointment and judicial control, and judicial termina­tion of the special prosecutor. The present one does not.
I was complaining about control of the prosecutor by the courts, which I think is right. Also, the question arose in those hearings whether Congress could, by statute, protect a special prosecutor, so he could only be fired for cause.
And as I recall what I said then—and I do not, heeding the warn­ing given me by Senator Thurmond, I am just repeating what I said then—was that Congress probably could protect the special prosecutor from discharge except for cause, if that special prosecu­tor was a subordinate official, that is, somebody appointed by the Attorney General, rather than somebody appointed by the Presi­dent and confirmed by the Senate, because the case law seems to suggest that the President has much more power over an official he appoints and the Senate confirms, than he does over a subordi­nate official appointed by a department head. So I made that dis­tinction back then.
Senator KENNEDY. That is a welcome one because as you very well know, the special prosecutor statute has been invoked several times, both by the Carter and the Reagan administrations. In fact five separate special prosecutors are now investigating the Presi­dent and former members of the Reagan administration, including an investigation of the Attorney General himself.
Judge BORK. Senator, I want to stress, particularly in light of what Senator Thurmond said, that I am merely calling to your at­tention what I said in 1973. I am not in any way passing judgment on the current statute or any aspect of it.
Senator KENNEDY. NO. But you have not published anything since 1973.
Judge BORK. Not that I recall.
Senator KENNEDY. SO that is the last public statement that you have made on it. Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator KENNEDY. That matter has been before the Congress,
been debated, been discussed by this Committee. There is a wide range kind of involvement of special prosecutors in this administra­tion, and your last statement is the statement on the special pros­ecutor I referred to above, which I think we have to take at face value since you have not published, or at least stated, or put in any of your speeches, anything else to change that.
Judge BORK. Pardon me?
Senator KENNEDY. I mean, I respect that you may not want to comment on a particular matter that is even now before the Court, but I think it is fair for us to draw certain conclusions from the statements that you made in 1973, your last statements with regard to it, particularly since you have been so involved in the whole question of special prosecutors.
Moving to another area, I would like to ask you about congres­sional standing to bring law suits challenging abuses of the Consti­tution by the President.
Obviously, as in the case of the War Powers Act, Congress cannot run the executive branch, and we cannot take the President into court every time we disagree with a policy of the administration. But that is not the issue. In a few very important situations, mem­bers of Congress should have the right to resort to the courts to preserve the constitutional role of Congress. That is what we call the doctrine of congressional standing, the right of members of Congress to sue in the courts.
In a dissenting opinion in 1985, is it not true you said, and I quote, "We ought to renounce outright the whole notion of congres­sional standing"? Then you went on to state in that opinion, and I quote,
When Federal courts approach the brink of general supervision of Government, as they do here, the eventual outcome may even be more calamitous than the loss of judicial protection of our liberties.
Since you issued that opinion, have you expressed any different view?
Judge BORK. No, I have not. Perhaps I should explain a little bit about that. The doctrine of congressional standing, as you and I know, Senator, but perhaps not everybody listening to us knows, is the theory
that if the President does not enforce the law the way Congress
thinks it intended the law to be enforced, a Congressman may sue
to get an injunction or a declaratory judgment against the Presi­dent to make him do what the Congressman wants him to do.
That is an entirely novel constitutional doctrine which I think was never heard of before 1974 in the case you brought, Kennedy v.
Sampson and it is confined to the circuit court on which I sit. I do
not think any other circuit has ever picked up that doctrine. So it
is a constitutional novelty, and it is by no means settled. And the Supreme Court has not passed upon it.
The reason I am troubled by it as follows: What it will lead to is, I think, other domination of the Government by the judiciary. If a
Congressman has something akin to a property interest or something in the law he passes, if it is not carried out properly, so that
his official capacity is in some sense diminished, then I think the
President has an equal interest in not being forced to do things he
regards as improper or unconstitutional. Therefore, if Congressmen
may sue the President because he is not doing something under the
law they would like, if the Congress overrides a presidential veto
and the President thinks that cuts into his constitutional office too
much, the President can sue the Congress.
For example, I spent some time as Solicitor General trying to get
a case on the legislative veto. I wanted to see whether that thing
was constitutional. If I had understood the theory of congressional
standing, which is really governmental standing, I could have
stopped hunting for a case. I could just have had the President sue
the Congress and get a declaration right away. But if it is true of a President and Congress, it is also true of
judges. If Congress passes a statute that I think cuts into my
powers, I can go to the Supreme Court for a declaration of unconstitutionally. In fact, that happened. Two judges in the Northern
District of Illinois were reversed by the seventh circuit, and the
judges petitioned for certiorari to the Supreme Court on the
grounds that the seventh circuit had done things to their office
which were improper. Everybody is going to be in the federal court defining their rights
of office instantly. What is important to remember about congressional standing is it is not the only way you can get those issues
before the Court. If the President does something that is not in accordance with the law, there is almost always a private individual
who can sue and who can show injury; and he can then challenge
the President's action, which is exactly what happened in the old
pocket veto cases. Senator KENNEDY. Well, I must say that I have difficulty in quite
accepting the premise that we would find each of the various respective branches suing the others, because the speech and debate
clause forbids lawsuits against members of Congress for actions in
their official capacity. For any speech or debate in either House,
they shall not be questioned in any other place. Judges under the
Stump v. Sparkman decision are immune from suit for decisions
they make. Congressional standing may not always be appropriate, but it
clearly is appropriate when the President unconstitutionally claims
a duly enacted law is not a law at all. I think we are not opening
the floodgates by giving Congress the power to go into court in a
narrow range of cases where the President has abused his power
and denied the rights of Congress under the Constitution. You say
that the Congress cannot even raise the question in court because
that sort of litigation would open up the doors to all sorts of other
abuses. I believe that is just another example of your attempt to
draw a bright line that just does not make any sense. In Judge BORK. That was not a bright—I am sorry, Senator. Senator KENNEDY. I will just finish this thought, and whatever
comment you have, obviously we would welcome. In recent years, a number of Senators and Congressmen of both
parties thought the President was not acting in accord with the
Constitution. They tried to take the administration to court. I
think Barry Goldwater would be surprised to hear that you did not
think he had standing to challenge President Carter on the Taiwan
Defense Treaty. I think Jesse Helms would be surprised to hear
that you do not think he had standing to challenge President
Carter on the Panama Canal Treaty. Many other Senators have
filed actions in federal courts, including Senator Melcher, Senator
Metzenbaum, Senator Pressler, Senator Proxmire, Senator Riegle,
Senator Trible and others.
The issue has nothing to do with the merits of the cases. The
point is, Mr. Bork, you seem to think that the members of Congress
343
are in these instances second-class citizens. You close the courthouse door on all of us, and we never get our day in court. Senator THURMOND. Mr. Chairman, I want to say again Senator KENNEDY. Could I hear from the witness? Senator THURMOND. Well, I am making a point. I want to say
again that there is a case pending that may be before the Supreme
Court. Again, I would caution the witness on this point. Judge BORK. I will just answer two points that seem to me to
be The CHAIRMAN. Judge, let me make clear, you are the one to
make the judgment as to whether or not it is something that may
in any way compromise you. I appreciate the Senator's admonition,
but please proceed. Judge BORK. I will say, then, something that does not compromise me. I have written what I have written. It is a long opinion,
and it is all laid out. But let me just say this: Senator Goldwater would not be surprised to learn that I have these views, because when he brought
that case about the Panama Canal, some of the lawyers working
with him called me about my involvement. And I said, "I do not
think you have standing." And they never called back. So he will
not be surprised to hear this. Senator KENNEDY. I cannot understand why. Just a follow-up on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act,
when we discussed the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act you
mentioned two cases. Were those cases challenges to the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act? Judge BORK. Oh, no. They were challenges to the President's constitutional power to issue a surveillance order without a warrant. Senator KENNEDY. SO the Foreign Intelligence Act has never
been found to be unconstitutional? Judge BORK. Oh, no. Senator KENNEDY. Just to summarize, Judge Bork, the American
people rely on the Congress to protect them from abuses of power
by the executive branch. But, Judge Bork, whenever Congress has
tried to curb abuses, you always seem to side with the President.
You broke the law in Watergate when you obeyed President Nixon
and fired Archibald Cox. You have testified that court-appointed
special prosecutors are unconstitutional, which suggests that you
would let the administration investigate itself when corruption is
the issue. You oppose limits on the national security power of the President, even when the issue is wire-tapping and eavesdropping on
American citizens. Those cases you mentioned did not address the
constitutionality of the act. You believe that Congress can never use the courts to challenge
the President when he abuses his power. You wrote that the War
Powers Act was probably unconstitutional. You suggested that Congress has no power to stop the President from taking us into a
wider war in Vietnam. And that same reasoning would apply to
sending U.S. military aid to the contras in Nicaragua or even selling the arms to the Ayatullah in Iran.
The Constitution calls for checks and balances. You seem to feel
that when it comes to the relation between Congress and the Presi­dent, instead of checks and balances the President has a blank
check and the Congress exerts no balance at all.
You say you believe in the original intent, Mr. Bork, but the
Founding Fathers certainly did not intend an all-powerful President. Judge BORK. Senator Kennedy, I must say I think those are most
unfair characterizations of my views. Let me start—I hardly know
where to start. In your case, when you challenged President Nixon's pocket veto,
and that pocket veto was held unconstitutional by the D.C. Circuit,
I did not take certiorari because I thought the D.C. Circuit was correct. When the Ford administration began to use a combination
return veto and pocket veto, I announced that that was incorrect,
and I would not argue their case in the Supreme Court. I then prepared a lengthy analysis of the constitutionality of the
pocket veto and concluded against the President, which I sent to
Attorney General Levi. He sent it to the White House with a notation that he agreed with my analysis and that I would not argue
the case if they had to go to the Supreme Court, which would be a
clear signal that the Solicitor General disagreed with him. I concluded in that analysis that when Congress adjourns and
leaves behind an officer to receive a return veto, which is quite different in its consequences from a pocket veto, the President may be
required to use a return veto and not a pocket veto, because that
was the original understanding, so far as I could tell, of the pocket
veto clause. That is an example where I sided with Congress against the
President when I was in the executive branch. Now, you said a number of other things, that I broke the law in
Watergate. I said yesterday that I did not break the law in Watergate. There is no existing court opinion that says I did, and I gave
Senator Metzenbaum the reasons why I thought I did not break
the law in that case. And I should say, I was not in Watergate. I
came down here June 27th of 1973. I did not even know the principal characters in that. I have never met them. Senator METZENBAUM. YOU said there is no existing opinion?
There certainly is.Judge BORK. There is not. That was a vacated opinion, Senator. Senator METZENBAUM. The opinion is there. Senator HATCH. But it was vacated. Judge BORK. It is in print. It has been declared to have no legal
force or effect whatsoever. Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman? The CHAIRMAN. Senator Kennedy has the floor and Judge Bork.
Let it proceed that way.
Senator KENNEDY. Before we leave standing, did you think the
 
Court was correct on the standing? Judge BORK. The congressional standing? No. I said that in
Barnes v. Kline, Senator.
You said I think the special prosecutor statute is unconstitutional. I must remind you, Senator, that I said the ones that were being
proposed back in 1973 I thought unconstitutional. It is a very different statute now.
You said I think the War Powers Act is unconstitutional. I think
there are parts of it, if applied in certain ways, may be unconstitutional, and I think the legislative veto aspect of it has been held
unconstitutional. I do not know about the rest of it. In fact, the
notice provisions and the reporting provisions seem constitutional. So I do not think my views are accurately characterized by your
final remarks. Senator KENNEDY. Just finally, did you also decide not to bring
the Sampson case before the Court because you were afraid of the
decision upholding congressional standing by the Court? Judge BORK. Well, I thought that pocket veto was so unconstitu­tional, the President's use of it, that it would put pressure on the—
sometimes courts in order to get to an issue tend to overlook the
jurisdictional issue. I thought the poorness of the case on the
merits might damage the case on the standing issue. I do not know
if it would have or not, but any litigator thinks about things like
that. Senator KENNEDY. Did you think it would, at the time? Judge BORK. I was not sure, but since I had no interest in trying
to uphold that pocket veto, I saw no point in going up—in fact, I
was sure I would lose on that pocket veto. I saw no point in going
up and putting just the question of congressional standing in issue,
and I certainly had no power or authority to go up and said, "I
want to discuss congressional standing, although I agree with Senator Kennedy on the pocket veto." That would not be a case or controversy. Senator KENNEDY. My time is up, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. Judge, as I said, we will take a 5­minute break. If there happens to be a vote, it will be more like ten
minutes, and we will come back. Before we adjourn for lunch, we
will do Senator Hatch and Senator Metzenbaum. Then we will adjourn for lunch. We will probably be recessed for approximately 10 to 15 minutes
while we go vote.The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order. We will, as I
said, take two more Senators, and then break for lunch. Senator Hatch. Senator HATCH. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, I have sat through hours and hours of these hearings with you. I personally want to compliment you because I think
that on this particular day, September 17, 1987, 200 years of history and the Constitution, I think you have done as much as anybody
else or any program on television or any commentator to talk
about the viability of our Constitution and how it works and how
great minds help it work than anybody else will today. I think it is
a very historic occasion to have you sitting here in front of this
committee answering these very, very technical and difficult questions. Over the last three days, you have taken some of the toughest
issues I have ever seen, and you answered them with aplomb, with
credibility, no question with erudition, and no question within the
mainstream of the law of this country, or any law anywhere.
I find it kind of interesting that Senator Kennedy's questions
ranged from the War Powers Act—and I thought you made it very
clear what some of the real discrepancies and problems are with
regard to that particular bill; the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act, you could not have given a better explanation off the top of
your head than you did on that; the Special Prosecutors or Independent Counsel Act, the question of standing—very, very difficult,
complex constitutional and legal issues. Once again, we heard Senator Kennedy suggest that you broke
the law when you followed President Nixon's order to fire Archibald Cox. Now, that is false. No court opinion remains valid today,
or even remains on the book, that says that you have broken the
law. In fact, to the contrary. A single federal judge who was caught
up in the momentous events of that occasion basically said something to that effect, and his opinion was vacated. I think Senator
Kennedy knows that. That is why you were right when you said he
was being unfair in some of these characterizations. And I only
choose that one unfair statement to bring to the attention of you
and our public out there. That case is a nullity. It was erased. It was wiped off. It is zip as
far as the laws of this land is concerned. It was so fallacious that it
had to be erased. As a matter of fact, the people who asked for it to
be erased were the plaintiffs. You wanted the case to be appealed
as far as I know. Judge BORK. Right. Senator HATCH. Because you were so sure that it would be reversed—so were the people who brought it because they also, I presume, were sure it would be reversed. Upon reversal, it would be
erased in a way that would be much more persuasive than the
plaintiffs just voluntarily asking for a vacated order. Let me just ask you a question about the significance of the vacated opinion. Is it not true that the Supreme Court in the U.S. v.
Munsingware case said a vacated opinion "does not spawn any
legal consequences"?Judge BORK. That is entirely true, and the reason they vacate an
opinion under circumstances like that is that the party never had
his chance for his rights to get appellate review. If the case no
longer presents a live controversy, the party who appeals—and
that was me—does not get his day in the appellate court. So when
they hold that a case is moot, no longer a live controversy, they
remand with instructions to vacate under U.S. v. Munsingware. Senator HATCH. That is why you called it unfair to characterize
it as having broken the law.
Judge BORK. That is true. And I also think there is good legal
reason, which I gave yesterday, to think that that was not covered
by prior cases.
Senator HATCH. I think that makes the case pretty well. I think
it is unfair the way a number of these outside groups have been
characterizing your legal decisions. I think some of the inflammatory rhetoric you have dispelled, almost all of it, in your discussions here over the last three days, the misuse of statistics, the
unfair methodology, the unfair ads, the unfair rhetoric that has
been used all over the country. You know, we are not talking about
appointment of a local dogcatcher here. We are talking one of the
most important appointments in the history of our country, and we
are talking about it on the most important day in a long time, the
200th year bicentennial anniversary of our Constitution. I just suspect that you deserve fair treatment. I also get a kick out of the fact that Senator Kennedy seemed to
say that with regard to the War Powers Act, this was a very important bill, that almost an overwhelming majority of the people in
Congress passed it. Does the fact that a bill is passed by an overwhelming majority
of Congress guarantee its constitutionality? Judge BORK. Not in the slightest, Senator. Senator HATCH. YOU bet it does not. As a matter of fact, Gramm-
Rudman is a perfect illustration. A lot of these people voted for
Gramm-Rudman that hate the bill. But one aspect of that was
stricken down. It was your colleague—I was going to call him Senator Scalia, to misuse the term—but Justice Scalia and others who
struck that provision down. How about the Chadha case? The Chadha case is a perfect illustration—the one that you brought up here—the famous veto case.
In that particular case, when it was stricken, invalidated hundreds—at least probably a hundred—mostly overwhelmingly
passed statutes of the Congress of the United States. Judge BORK. It certainly did. Senator HATCH. SO the fact that Congress thinks something
should be done in an overwhelming fashion does not necessarily
mean that it is constitutional. Judge BORK. I think the number of Congressmen voting for a statute has nothing to do with its constitutionality. If it passes by
one vote or passes unanimously, it is still a statute and its constitutionality must be judged in the same way. Senator HATCH. The thing that has interested me over the last 3 days is I do not see how anybody, whether you are trained in the
law or not, would not be impressed with the way you have handled
these very intricate, difficult questions. And you have done it off
the top of your head. There is hardly anybody in this country that
can do that. It is difficult for me to understand why the furor about your
nomination here. It ought to be automatic, just as your nomination
was approved and confirmed to the second most important court in
this country, the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. I wonder why 5 years later all of a sudden you are in a contest
here, and I think the people out there are wondering too. If they
really look behind it and they see some of these unjust accusations
and some of these unjust characterizations, some of these rabid,
radical groups out there trying to destroy a reputation that has
been built very, very well over many, many years, I think they are
going to be a disgusted as I am, and I hope they are getting that
point.Let me go to some specifics, though. We have been talking about
a number of civil rights cases and in particular I would like to
dwell on the Katzenbach v. Morgan case, the 1966 case. That is
where the Supreme Court upheld a Congressional statute that re­defined the words of the Constitution itself as I view it. Is that a
fair characterization?
Judge BORK. That is exactly what happened, Senator.
Senator HATCH. This case involved the constitutional validity of a non-discriminatory literacy test. Earlier, in 1959, the Supreme Court had upheld the validity of non-discriminatory literacy tests and Lassiter v. Northampton is a perfect illustration.
But Congress then disliked that 1959 decision and therefore it overturned it by statute. Have I been fairly accurate in my charac­terization?
Judge BORK. That is correct. Congress did not overturn all liter­acy tests. It overturned literacy tests in particular kinds of cases. But they were, as you say, non-discriminatory.
Senator HATCH. Some commentators have suggested that your comments in opposition to Katzenbach were an effort to reinstate literacy tests for voters.
Judge BORK. Absolutely not.
Senator HATCH. Let me ask you directly, so nobody has any ques­tion about it, was your criticism of the Katzenbach case based on your approval of literacy tests?
Judge BORK. Absolutely not, Senator. I have, in matter of fact, no view of literacy tests. I have never looked at how they operate. I
know some of them are discriminatorily used, but if they are nondiscriminatory, I have no view of how they operate and none of my
criticisms of any of these cases implies agreement with the statute which was being discussed. None of them.
That is only for a result oriented judge, a judge who wants re­sults. I do not care about that. I care about whether it comes out of
the Constitution and whether it is reached by proper constitutional reasoning.
Senator HATCH. Other commentators have suggested that your criticism of this case indicates opposition to Congressional attempts
to overcome or to remedy past discrimination. Now, do you agree
that Congress has the power and should use those powers to prohibit any literacy test that is employed to discriminate on the basis of race?
Judge BORK. Of course. Congress has the power and so does the Supreme Court. No literacy test that is used to discriminate can
stand scrutiny under the equal protection clause of the 14th
amendment. And Congress, in the Voting Rights Act, has gone further under its remedial powers under section 5 of the 14th amendment, to establish prophylactic measures to prevent discrimination from creeping into the voting process.
Senator HATCH. If I understand your argument, you said in the Katzenbach case that if Congress can undertake its own interpretation of the Constitution by a mere majority vote, then the Constitution is not going to be the anchor holding our nation in place
during political crises; is that right?
Judge BORK. Well, let me make two points about that, Senator.
In 1803 Chief Justice John Marshall decided the case of Marbury v.
Madison in which he for the first time gave an extensive rationale
for the power of the judiciary to strike down statutes. Central to
his reasoning was the fact that the Constitution would be meaningless if Congress could alter it by a mere statute.
Katzenbach v. Morgan is in direct conflict with that historic deci­sion because it did allow Congress to alter a constitutional provi­sion by statute.
The other point I want to make is this, when I wrote suggesting the—not deciding—but suggesting the constitutionality of the President's 1972 bill placing limitations on bussing—not abolishing bussing—placing some limitations on it, I could easily have relied upon Katzenbach v. Morgan if I were result oriented. In what I wrote I explicitly said, it is a bad decision, I will not rely upon it to get my ends.
Senator HATCH. In other words, you could have used a conserva­tive approach to get what you wanted if you were results orient­ed
Judge BORK. That is right. Senator HATCH. as they have used a liberal approach by using Katzenbach to get whatever liberal result they want. Judge BORK. Yes. But my views in judging are not liberal or con­servative.
The other episode is, of course, my opposition before Senator East's subcommittee to the Human Life Bill which would have overturned Roe v. Wade, the abortion decision, by statute. And again, I opposed that bill—Senator East's bill—because it rested upon Katzenback v. Morgan—that is, the power of Congress to change the Constitution by statute—and I said Congress cannot do that.
Now, Congress can participate in changing the Constitution, but it does so by proposing an amendment to the Constitution which must go to the States.
Senator HATCH. Yes, by doing it pursuant to Article V of the Constitution.
Judge BORK. That is right. There is a constitutional procedure for Congress to participate in altering the Constitution, but it is not by passing a statute. It is by proposing a constitutional amendment.
Senator HATCH. Well, it is interesting that we on this 200th anni­versary bring up the venerable case of Marbury v. Madison because basically that established the principle of judicial review and if we go the route of the Katzenbach case the way you have discussed it, then it would become the principal of political review rather than judicial review.
Judge BORK. That is right. It would be a revolution in our consti­tutional structure and would mean the Constitution effectively con­trols nothing that the Congress wants to do.
Senator HATCH. Anytime Congress wants to overrule it, they can do it, basically, under the Katzenbach theory.
Judge BORK. Under Katzenbach. Katzenbach could be a disaster for minorities. I mean, we all assume that Congress will only use its powers to alter the Constitution in ways that we like. That is by no means true. One cannot be sure of that.
Senator HATCH. I think your position not only is logical, it sounds like the only sound course of constitutional interpretation. Let me just say, Justices Harlan and Stewart dissented from that decision, saying it would be a, quote, "sacrifice of fundamentals in the American constitutional system, the separation between the legislative and judicial function," unquote.
Four years after Katzenbach the Court refused to extend the doctrine to uphold the constitutionality of Congress' attempt to lower
the voting age from 21 to 18. So they refused to extend Katzenbach.
That was in Oregon v. Mitchell. And as a result of that, Congress
then did act pursuant to constitutional authority, went to article V
and passed an amendment by the appropriate two-thirds vote and
went out and got it ratified by three-quarters of the States and
today 18-year-olds can vote. That is the appropriate way to resolve
these matters. Not by mere statute. Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HATCH. That is a principal position. I might add that in
that case, Oregon v. Mitchell, which said that Congress cannot just
go out and by statute use Katzenbach to allow 18-year-olds to vote
without going through the constitutional procedure that was required. In that case Justices Burger, Stewart, Harlan, Black and
Blackmun voted against the Katzenbach principal. Moreover, Justice Powell cited Harlan's Katzenbach dissent with
approval in the City of Rome case. Of course, that was a voting
rights case and the very person you are to replace cited those dissents as reasonable. Now, he too endorsed the view that you have taken of this particular case, so once again you are in excellent company, even
though your critics have tried to distort what you have said in this
particular area. So those who criticize your view it seems to me it
is incumbent upon them to also explain why they are criticizing
Justices Harlan, Black, Burger, Stewart, Blackmun and Powell. So when anybody says you are outside of the mainstream, then I
suspect they are saying they are too. Judge BORK. There seem to be a lot of us out there, outside the mainstream. Senator HATCH. There seem to be a lot of you top experts out
there. That is right. Let me ask another question. You testified, as you have mentioned, against the Human Life Bill in 1981. That was an attempt
by certain Congressmen to redefine the term "person" in the Constitution to include unborn children. You are criticized by some for
opposing this right-to-life initiative, albeit a misguided right-tc-life
initiative. Now, did you anticipate the consequences of opposing this rightto-life initiative before your testimony in 1981? Judge BORK. Certainly. I knew that a number of groups who were part of—who were the conservative coalition—if you want to
put it that way, would be extremely angry with me for opposing it. Senator HATCH. They were. Judge BORK. They were extremely angry with me for suggesting—in fact, I think I had a debate on McNeil/Lehrer once—you
were not angry with me, but a lot of people were angry with me. Senator HATCH. I was on your side on that one. Judge BORK. They were suggesting that I said the Congress could
not constitutionally take away the Supreme Court's jurisdiction in
abortion cases. I do not think the exception clause of article III can
be used to take away jurisdiction because you do not like the results of a case.
Senator HATCH. Had you wanted to, you could have used Katzen­bach to justify that type of a decision.
Judge BORK. Certainly.
Senator HATCH. YOU could have just said that Congress can do this under a Supreme Court decision establishing that Congress by
majority vote in these types of cases could do exactly that. But you
held to a principle ground that it did not make any difference what
is liberal or conservative, but whether it is right judicially. I think that needs to be pointed out.
You pointed out the issue on bussing. You could have easily taken that case to justify overturning some of the bussing decisions in this country.
Judge BORK. I certainly could have. I could have also taken the position that Congress has the power to take away the jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court under article III, and I refused to take that position.
Senator HATCH. The reason I am pointing this out is because you have been accused of being potentially one of those who would use
the powers of the judicial branch to bend the law to meet your personal ideological beliefs, and I think these instances are perfect illustrations as to why you stood tall against ideology and did what was right under the law.
Judge BORK. That is what I thought I was doing, Senator. I still think so. Senator HATCH. That is what I think you were doing, as well,
and I think that the criticisms that you have undergone are base­less and false and I think, basically, scurrilous.
Now, let me just go to a couple of other things. Let's talk about your civil rights record as Solicitor General. We have heard many
allegations that you, Judge Bork, are insensitive to civil rights of
minorities and women. One distorted charge even alleged that you
find no basis for the rule that the federal government may not engage in racial discrimination.
Now, these allegations continue to say that the—one of them said, quote, "the vigor with which you would enforce the Boiling v.
Sharpe case would be colored by your conviction that Boiling itself is bad law."
Now, would your enforcement be hindered by an academic con­cern about the way that decision was reached? Judge BORK. NO. A lot of people have had concerns about the
way that decision was reached, but it is firmly in place. A lot of
expectations, a lot of institutions and so forth have grown up
around it. The due process clause has now been repeatedly used as
if it had an equal protection component in it. I have no desire and I
would not attempt either to overrule Boiling v. Sharpe or to get
the equal protection component out of the due process clause. That is established law.
Senator HATCH. That is twice you have made that point and I think it ought to now be made moot on that particular question. Judge BORK. Pardon me, Senator. You know, it occurs to me, somebody suggested to me overnight—and I do not want to take a position on it—but I was asked whether I could think of a way to justify Boiling v. Sharpe on some other grounds and somebody suggested to me that it might be like my analysis of Pierce v. Society of Sisters, which was an attempt to stamp out private schools that
taught religion, and I said that could be stopped—the attempt to
stamp them out—could be stopped on first amendment grounds.
There was a statute in Meyer v. Nebraska which prohibited the
teaching of students in a foreign language, and I said that statute could be invalidated on first amendment grounds.
It has been suggested to me, and I do not take a position on it either way, that Boiling v. Sharpe, which struck down the statute
segregating students on the basis of race, might also conceivably be
justified on first amendment grounds. That is just a theory. I was
asked whether I could think of a way one might approach it legiti­mately. That might be a way. I do not take a position on it.
Senator HATCH. Without reference to any specific cases, is it fair to say that you would feel compelled as Justice of the United
States Supreme Court to refuse to enforce any law or policy that
denied any citizen the right to vote or the right to equal protection of the laws because of his or her race?
Judge BORK. That is absolutely true, Senator. I have endorsed ev­erything from Brown v. Board of Education on up. The Voting
Rights Act, I have decided a case under and upheld the Voting Rights Act.
Senator HATCH. Let's get into that. Your words, I think, again, completely dispose of the charge that you are insensitive to civil
rights. Moreover, I would suggest, again, that your actions speak a lot louder than words; certainly the words of your detractors.
And your actions are even more impressive than your words with respect to civil rights because both as Solicitor General and as
a judge on the D.C. Circuit, my research indicates that you have
never advocated a position less sympathetic to minority or female
plaintiffs than that ultimately adopted by the Supreme Court or Justice Powell.
In other words, you have consistently been just a sympathetic or more sympathetic to civil rights than the current Supreme Court and the justice that you would replace.
Now, I realize that the one exception to this rule would be cases where a federal law or policy was challenged under civil rights law.
In such cases, the Solicitor General is compelled to defend the le­gality of government actions, except in the most egregious cases.
I realize that you may not have analyzed your own record from this standpoint, but outside of your duties as Solicitor General, can
you think of a single time where you as Solicitor General or as a
judge advocated a position less favorable to minorities or women than that adopted by the Supreme Court and/or Justice Powell?
Judge BORK. There is no such case, Senator. This reminds me of questions asked by Senator DeConcini, and when the Senator is
here, I did collect or have collected the briefs—well, I may as well
do it now—the briefs I filed in the Supreme Court when I was Solicitor General supporting the rights of women, including amicus
briefs, where I had more latitude, and I have collected, as well, my
substantive decisions on women's and minority rights, and as I said
yesterday, in seven out of eight cases I held for the women or the
minority.
Now, Senator Humphrey mentioned yesterday that he had a case
I did not have on here, which was age discrimination. But I think since the subject that was raised by Senator DeConcini was women and minority rights, I have not included the age discrimination case on this. But I would like to submit those for the record, these compilations of my briefs and my opinions.
The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, they will be put in the record.
Senator HATCH. Let me just say, on the other hand, can you think of any cases where you have advocated an advance in civil
rights that was rejected by the Supreme Court and/or Justice
Powell? Judge BORK. Yes, I can think of one offhand. I think that was the
General Electric case. Senator HATCH. General Electric v. Gilbert case. Judge BORK. Yes, where the brief argued that employment discrimination based on pregnancy violated title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, and six Justices rejected my argument. But
then Congress, in 1978, adopted my position when it amended title
VII. Senator HATCH. NOW, is that not interesting. Here is a situation where you are being accused of being insensitive to civil rights
where you advocated more than the Supreme Court was willing to
do; and then later the Congress adopts your position—I might add
with my vote for it, out of my committee. That is interesting. Congress passed the Pregnancy Discrimination Act in 1976, as I
recall, to overturn the Supreme Court's restrictive rating in title
VII, and we really adopted the position that you argued in the
Court at that time. Let me look at another example. Would you sketch the issue in
the case of Washington v. Davis. That is a 1976 case where the disparate impact on minorities appeared with regard to written examinations given to job applicants, if you recall that case. Judge BORK. Well, I am looking for it here. I do not know if it is in mySenator HATCH. Let me see if I can help on that. In that case,
you contended that the employment test with a discriminatory
effect should be unlawful under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964. The Supreme Court decided against your broader reading of
the law and in favor of the intent test. Now, do you recall how Justice Powell voted on that case? Judge BORK. NO, Senator. I cannot say that I do. Senator HATCH. He disagreed with your broad reading of the
civil rights law. Again, you were broader than Mr. Justice Powell
was since you advocated as Solicitor General. I would like to emphasize that I do not offer these observations as a commentary on
Justice Powell's record. I thought he was a great Justice and a
wonderful man. I think we all revere him as a great jurist. My only point is that it flies in the face of the short-sighted and,
I think, misleading effort to resort to labels to characterize your
work with regard to civil rights. It again adds to my position and
my case that I think we are making here that you have been equal
to or more than an advocate in civil rights than your predecessor,
assuming you are confirmed to this position. Judge BORK. Well, Senator Hatch, actually, I do not know where these charges that I would not decide cases in favor of minorities
or women come from, because I have done that consistently in both
government positions I have held. Senator HATCH. YOU sure have. Let me just read the list of a whole bunch of cases. Let me list them at one time, and let me
mention them all together.
In Beer v. U.S. in 1976, you contended that a New Orleans reapportionment act violated the Voting Rights Act because it diluted
black voting strength.In Teamsters v. U.S. in 1977, you argued that a seniority system
that perpetuated the effects of discrimination violated title VII.
In Pasadena v. Spongier in 1975, you contended that even a
school district with a busing plan can be ordered to achieve even a
better racial balance. Now, in each of those cases, Justice Powell voted against your
effort to advance civil rights. Judge BORK. As you say, Senator, you by no means intend to
criticize Justice Powell. Senator HATCH. NO, I am not. Judge BORK. I want to make sure everybody understands that because I, too, think he is a great Justice and I, too, know him personally and think he is a great man. He voted against me, but that
does not say anything about him. Senator HATCH. I agree with that, and I would just say that I agree with you that Justice Powell has an excellent record. Yet in
these five cases I have just named, his actions were actually less
sensitive to civil rights than yours, which I think flies in the face of
the arguments against you: that you are out of the mainstream;
that you are going to upset the balance; that you are going to hurt
the Court, et cetera, et cetera. And I think, again, it goes to some
of the scurrilous things that have been said about you that I think
have no basis whatsoever. Now, I think people could read those five cases, and they could
conclude that Justice Powell was not in tune with the minority
needs. Just the opposite is true. You know it and I know it, yet we
have heard in one or two isolated quotes, far less authoritatively
than those five votes that you did, that have been cited by the opposition to your record on a specific issue. I might just make one more comparison with the current Justice.
In the 19 amicus briefs you filed, friend-of-the-court briefs that you
filed as Solicitor General, do you know which Justice who is still on
the Court sided with you most often? Judge BORK. I do not, Senator. Senator HATCH. That is not a fair question because you probably
did not analyze that. Judge BORK. NO. I used to just count whether I won or lost. Senator HATCH. Well, it was actually Justice Brennan. Judge BORK. IS that right? Senator HATCH. That is right. In fact, during your tenure as Solicitor General, you filed 19 friend-of-the-court briefs in civil rights
cases other than those where a federal law or policy was challenged. In those 19 cases, you as Solicitor General sided with the
minority or female plaintiff 17 times, 17 out of 19 for those who
would like to know. In the two cases where you felt compelled by law to argue
against the minority or female, the Supreme Court agreed with you
in those arguments.
My time is up. Let me just finish my remarks on this one point. I
am sorry, Mr. Chairman.
Thus, 19 out of 19 times, you were at least as sensitive to civil
rights as Mr. Justice Powell and the Supreme Court, and in 17 of
19 times, you sided with minorities and women. Now, some have
said this means little because you were only defending government
policy. Does a Solicitor General have to file amicus or friend-of-thecourt briefs? Judge BORK. Oh, no. Senator HATCH. Can you explain the amount of discretion that a
Solicitor General enjoys with regard to litigating strategies and positions? Judge BORK. Well, I think the Solicitor General, if he is defending the government, has very little discretion unless the government's position is not intellectually respectable. And I have confessed error in the Supreme Court when that was the case. But when he is filing an amicus brief, he has more latitude to
decide whether or not the position being taken is not just intellectually respectable, but really ought to prevail or come close—you
know, I do not mean ought to prevail. It is kind of hard to state a
precise calibration of the degree of his latitude, but I think when
he is filing an amicus brief he has to be more in sympathy with the
position than he does when he is defending a client. Senator HATCH. My time is up. I have a lot more I would like to
go into to show that the accusations against you are not only scurrilous but unfounded. I would also like to, before we are through
here, go into your record as a judge because I think people out
there need to hear this, because some of the scurrilous, unfounded,
ridiculous, I think scandalous and libelous comments made about
you need to be dispelled. It is unfortunate that in this forum you
really do not have enough time to do it. If we had enough time, we
would dispel every doggone one of them. I think the American people need to know that. It is about time
they realize what a tremendous nominee they have, and I hope everybody out there is listening to your comments on the very, very
important 200th year anniversary of the Constitution. Judge BORK. Thank you, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Metzenbaum. Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, this question of your action
in firing Arch Cox is a matter I addressed yesterday, and I had no
intention of returning to it today. But since I have heard Senator
Kennedy, Senator Hatch—even somebody when I walked outside, a
member of the media—raise the question of whether it is appropriate to question the illegality of an act that you did in view of the
fact that the decision was vacated, let me put that in my own context. That is the only ruling of any court in connection with your
action, and that court decided that your action was illegal. Now, it
is a fact that thereafter you were precluded from having an opportunity to appeal that decision because the case had become moot.
There was no longer an issue before the court. That was because
Archibald Cox had gone back to Harvard; he had been replaced
with a new person.
Under those circumstances, Judge Bork, it seems to me that it is
very appropriate to point out the illegality of that act. It is the only
court—it is true you did not have a chance to appeal it. But I must say to you that I still consider it to be a relevant matter in connection with this hearing. Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I think it is important when we say
an illegal act, the illegal act was not illegal, and I will explain that,
too. But the illegality, if one existed, was merely that a regulation
was not rescinded before the discharge but afterwards. Now, that is
not a matter of great moral turpitude because I could have rescinded the regulation at any time.
But the reason I think it was not even technically illegal was
that the cases relied upon by the district court judge were cases in
which a department head, like an Attorney General, had issued a
regulation and then had gone ahead on his own discretion and violated it. In this case, the President gave me an order to discharge
Archibald Cox which I think overrides an Attorney General's regulation. That is why I think the action was legal. Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, in the Nixon case, the court specifically decided that the President did not have the legal authority to override a regulation put into place by the Attorney General. That is right on point in that particular case. Judge BORK. If I remember that case, Senator, I think what they
said was that the President had not attempted to rescind the regulation. That was a jurisdictional argument. Does anybody have the
Nixon case? Do you have a copy of it? Senator METZENBAUM. Let me read you a quote that my staff just handed me. Said the court, It is theoretically possible for the Attorney General to amend or revoke the regu­lation defining the special prosecutor's authority. So long as this regulation remains in force, the executive branch is bound by it, and, indeed, the United States as the sovereign composed of three branches is bound to respect and to enforce it.
That was the Nixon case. Judge BORK. That is right. Senator METZENBAUM. AS you remember, in the Gesell case, the
one that found it to be illegal, they indicated that your subsequent
revocation of the regulation and then putting the same regulation
back in place three weeks later, they said that was a ruse, a ruse to
get around the law. That is their phraseology, not mine. Judge BORK. I know. That is his phraseology. There was no ruse
and no evidence of a ruse. If anybody thought up a ruse by which
he would replace Archibald Cox with Leon Jaworski, he did not
gain anything because Leon Jaworski was a very tough prosecutor. Senator METZENBAUM. I am not taking issue with that. Judge BORK. And let me say one other thing. The argument in
U.S. v. Nixon being advanced by the White House lawyers, by the
President's lawyers, was that there was no jurisdiction in the case
because Mr. Jaworski was a subordinate official to the President,
and the President could give Mr. Jaworski an order. The court responded that as long as the regulation was in force, until the President rescinded the order, there was jurisdiction; but there was no
doubt that the President had the power to rescind that charter. In
fact, in the letter from the President to me that night, he said,
"You are to discharge Mr. Cox and abolish the office of special
prosecutor." The abolition of the office was on paper only. The
office continued intact. But that was a presidential rescission of the
regulation.
Senator METZENBAUM. Yes, but the court said in the Nixon case, "So long as this regulation is extant, it has the force of law." Judge BORK. So long as it is extant. It was not extant after the
President issued that order. Senator METZENBAUM. I think the case also held, as I previously stated, that as long as it was there the President did not have the
authority; that he did not have the legal authority to revoke the
regulation that was in effect. It was the Attorney General's regulation. Senator THURMOND. Senator Metzenbaum, would you mind pro­viding a copy of that? Judge BORK. The fact is the President has the legal authority by
ordering the Attorney General, which is the way it is done. The
contrary position means that an Attorney General, by giving somebody a charter, can give him life tenure in the Department of Justice like a professor, and nobody can ever revoke it. That just is not
the way this government runs. Senator METZENBAUM. Let us say the Secretary of Commerce or Transportation issues a regulation saying clerical workers will not
be fired without 2 weeks' notice. Or the Secretary of Interior issues
a regulation saying that whistleblowers—that is, employees who
reveal problems—will not be fired without a hearing. Would you
say that the President has the authority to order their firing over
and above that regulation? Judge BORK. I think the President has the authority to tell the
Secretary of Commerce to rescind that regulation and fire. Senator METZENBAUM. Correct. He has that authority to tell the Secretary to rescind the regulation, but not to move in in spite of
the regulation and order the firing or denial of the employee's
hearing. Judge BORK. Well, that letter from President Nixon, we can
debate the legality of this forever, and we are debating the legality
of a technical deficiency about which came first, the rescission or
the firing. But the letter itself from the President called for the rescission of the regulation by saying abolish the office. So that is
what I thought I was doing. Senator METZENBAUM. Let us go on. Let us talk about antitrust, a subject dear to you and dear to me. I must say that your book,
"The Antitrust Paradox," which is certainly well written, attempts
to make the point that the antitrust laws do not help consumers
but that, in fact, they hurt consumers. Judge BORK. Senator, may I respond to that? Senator METZENBAUM. May I just finish? Judge BORK. I am sorry. I thought you were. Senator METZENBAUM. YOU certainly can, and I would expect you
to but let me at least finish. Judge BORK. I am sorry. I thought you were finished. Senator METZENBAUM. I believe that the antitrust laws are nonpartisan. They first came into being when John Sherman, a Republican Senator from my own State, authored the law. They have
been in effect for many years. They have been effectively enforced
by Republican and Democratic Presidents, and some Republican
Presidents were particularly strong in enforcing them.
I believe the effective enforcement of antitrust laws and those
antitrust laws are important to the free enterprise system. I think
it makes competition work in this country. And I think competition
is important to the consumers of this country, the people who go to the store and buy something.
What concerns me is that your position with respect to antitrust is that somehow you are getting something called consumer welfare, and then you have an economic efficiency, and that business
will operate better, and somehow it will help the consumers down below.
What bothers me, Judge Bork, are those people in my State and throughout the country who are presently going to a store and
buying products at a discount price, at a competitive price, and you
would take away the right of those retailers to compete; you would
take away the right to keep competition in the country and permit
only two to three companies to operate in the whole nation in any particular area.
I am frank to say to you, you can write 460 pages—and they are marvelously written—but the little guy out in Ohio, the little
woman who is trying to buy clothes for her children, or the person
who wants to buy a bicycle for their kids, they want to buy it at
the cheapest possible price. And if we were to follow your theory of the law, they would not be able to do so.
Judge BORK. Senator, my entire book, which was published in 1978, is premised on the question of what best serves consumers,
what best serves consumer welfare. I have not made a single argument in this book which is not based upon that, and it could be
that I have made some arguments which are wrong. I do not think
they were wrong when I wrote them. Economics continues to advance. Maybe it will be shown that I am wrong in some respects. I
would be very surprised if eventually I am not wrong in some respects because I do not pretend to have come to the end of economic theory. In fact, I am simply an amateur economist. I was then; I
am not now. But everything in that book is an argument from consumer wel­fare, including the argument that you refer to.
Now, the Supreme Court in the case of restraints upon dealers' competition has adopted part of my thesis since I wrote it. Part of it, not all of it.
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge, let us talk about price fixing for a minute, because it is part and parcel of this whole issue. You believe that the rule that we have had in this country since
1911 which prohibits manufacturers from fixing the retail price of
their products should be overturned. You have written, and I
quote, that "it should be completely lawful"—that is your phrase, "completely lawful"—"for a manufacturer to fix retail prices."
In other words, if somebody like K-Mart or Toys "R Us or some discounter is selling children's shoe at $25 and the manufacturer
wants them sold at $50, under your theory it would be entirely
lawful for the manufacturer to require the retailer to charge the
higher price. Now, that is price fixing, pure and simple, and it has
been illegal since 1911.
My question to you is, and I know you are profound in this area.
I know you studied this area. I know you are an authority on it.
But the people in this country who go and want to buy things at
the lowest possible price—and I conducted hearings on how much
lower prices were in discount stores than the regular retail price,
and it was amazing how little people came in and said what it
means to them to be able to buy a little piece of clothing for their
child for $6.95 instead of $10, or to buy a wheelbarrow or something for their children at a lower price, and those dollars mean so much.
Tell me in language that you and I can understand, and the American people can understand, how you can argue that price fixing is going to help the consumer?
Judge BORK. Well, in the first place, Senator, I think it is essen­tial to distinguish between price fixing between competitors, which
is illegal per se, meaning that it cannot be justified on any
grounds. I have agreed emphatically with that rule. I think if competitors fix prices they should be punished. They should be sued for
treble damages. They should be criminally prosecuted. No doubt about it.
We know why people fix prices; they want to make fatter profits than they should get under competition. We are now shifting to the
case that you bring up, which is, say a manufacturer who wants to
set the minimum price at which his retailers can sell. In 1911 the
Dr. Miles case examined the practice and said, we would not let the
dealers fix the price themselves and therefore it follows that we should not let the manufacturer fix their price for them.
That argument does not follow. The manufacturer who is fixing the price of the dealers has no reason in this world to want to give
them a fatter profit. What he wants them to do, usually, is to compete in a different way; compete by providing information, compete
by providing selling services, compete by adding things to the prod­uct.
Now, those are not bad activities and if he could own those deal­ers himself, or if he owned them himself, he would probably sell at
the price he fixed and add those services. It is merely a way of
doing by contract what he could do if he owned them, and the purpose is to get these people to compete in other ways and not below a certain price.
Now, that may be pro consumer or not. It can be viewed as pro consumer because the manufacturer has no incentive. He is not
getting any monopoly profit out of this. The manufacturer has no
incentive to do that unless more consumers respond to the particular behavior of dealers that he encourages with that price limita­tion.
Now, we are into a kind of arcane area
Senator METZENBAUM. But it is not arcane if you are a housewife. I took a survey in Cleveland and it showed that consumers
generally save up to a third at discount stores—$450 a year on
clothes, nearly $60 a year on electronics, over $40 a year on toys
for the children. The Justice Department has found that prior to
repeal of Miller-Tydings in 1975, the so-called fair trade laws,
prices were nearly 30 percent higher, costing consumers billions of
dollars. That was their determination.
As a matter of fact, I have a pretty good ally on this particular
issue, and that is, President Reagan spoke out against fair trade
365
laws, saying they hurt consumers by keeping prices up. Do you think that the President was wrong?
Judge BORK. It is only fair, Senator. He can oppose me on resale price maintenance. I oppose him on the balanced budget amend­ment. It seems to me we are even up.
But yes, I do not think the President—the President may be right or wrong, but I do not think he has engaged in this analysis of the economics of the situation. And remember, consumers—if the manufacturer sets a minimum price, consumers get something else. They get the additional services and information.
Senator METZENBAUM. What kind of service do you get when you buy a toy for your child or you buy a little dress for the baby? Judge BORK. Manufacturers do not typically find it useful to
maintain prices on a product like that. Let me give you an example
from real life. There was a time when you could set resale prices
on things like television and big appliances and so forth. And when
you did that, a store like Marshall Fields in Chicago would carry
the full line of the manufacturer's products so they could show you
every one, and they would have a knowledgeable person there to
explain the differences and so forth, because it paid them to do that.
Then, when resale price maintenance became impossible, a dis­count store opened up, and that is quite right. Prices dropped. But
people would come in and shop at Marshall Fields, look at all the
models and get all the information and explanation, write down
the model number, and go over to the discount store and buy it.
That is fine, except what happens is, Marshall Fields stopped sup­plying the information, showing all the models and so forth.
Now, that cost consumers, too. Some consumers want the infor­mation and want the services and the manufacturer would not put
in resale price maintenance unless he thought more consumers
would respond to that package of information services and so forth
than would respond to a lower price. Because his only interest is in selling as many as he can.
Now, I may be wrong about resale price maintenance. That was the analysis I went through in 1978. There may be new information. As I understand it—I have not been reading the economic lit­erature since—as I understand it, there is new economics about transaction costs, costs of providing information and so forth. It may conceivably alter my view if that is brought to my attention.
I am giving you the line of argument I followed in 1978.
Senator METZENBAUM. I understand your line of argument. I am not at all certain that the consumers of the country who would
have to pay higher prices if your line of argument were followed could understand it that well.
Judge BORK. Well, they might if they understood they were get­ting additional services and information in exchange. But I do not
know that I can provide all of that argument to them today. But
let me say this, Senator. If the Congress disagrees with me, all they have to do is say, no resale price maintenance.
Senator METZENBAUM. I am glad you said that, because Congress has made it as clear as day that it agrees with the Supreme Court's original decision outlawing resale price fixing. Despite Congress' approval of this decision, you have written that the Supreme Court
86-974 0 - 89 - 14
is free to overturn the law. In fact, I think you wrote that the law
was adopted by the Supreme Court and may be properly aban­doned by the Court.
But the fact is that the Congress has repealed the anti-trust ex­emption for fair trade laws. We have cut off funding, led by a Re­publican member of the Senate. When the Justice Department wanted to go in with an amicus brief on a resale price maintenance case, we have cut off the funding and we have resisted legislative changes in the law.
Under those circumstances, Congress does not want to change the law, but you are the one who apparently wants to change the law through the Supreme Court.
Judge BORK. No. The matter is somewhat more complex than that. You may be reading from—I do not know—you may be read­ing from an article I
Senator METZENBAUM. NO. I am reading from "Antitrust Para­dox" at page 298. Judge BORK. All right. In about 1978 or 1979, after the Sylvania
case came down allowing a manufacturer to divide his dealers territories—which is market division, which has the same effect as
price fixing—I then wrote—that is, the Supreme Court is somewhat
inconsistent in allowing market division of dealers' territories so
they cannot compete but not allowing setting the dealers' prices so
they cannot compete on price—but be that as it may, the Supreme Court has reached that.
Now, it may be, as I wrote in that article in the "Supreme Court Review"—I think it was, 1978 or 1979—that Congress' repeal of the
Miller-Tydings Act and the other act, whose name escapes me at
the moment, should be taken as Congress' will that the Court not allow resale price maintenance.
I suggested that in that article. I said, that may be the way it should go. But if that is the case, then the Supreme Court should
say, we do not feel free to revise the rule as to resale price maintenances because we think Congress has indicated something with
its repeal of the Miller-Tydings Act. But I said they should say that.
Senator METZENBAUM. I say, Judge, that in this area your view is very troublesome. You are on the opposite side of where you usually are, because here Congress has passed this law, Congress indicates that they like it, and for a court to change it today would be a rejection of Congress' will. It would be the court making law.
I am concerned, Judge, as to what assurance can you give us that the antitrust laws will be enforced and consumers protected if you
should become a member of the Supreme Court?
Judge BORK. I can give you every assurance, but it will have to
be according to my understanding of what the law means and what
the economics means.
Let me go back. In the Sherman Act, which is the act we are
talking about, which merely says that restraints of trade are illegal, the Congress rather clearly gave a mandate to the courts to
evolve the rules that would protect competition. And Senator Sherman said as much. He said he was really aiming at three classes of
cases—in his speech on the floor of the Senate—he was aiming at
price fixing between competitors, he was aiming at monopolistic mergers, and he was aiming at predatory conduct by a firm which
prevented competitors from competing effectively. Beyond that he said, the courts will have to evolve the rules to
protect consumers from time to time. In the great 1911 cases of
Standard Oil and American Tobacco, written by Chief Justice
White, he explicitly said that these statutes are aimed at practices
which restrict output. He gave three categories of cases. Senator METZENBAUM. They just told me I have 6 minutes. I do
not want to cut you off. Judge BORK. All right. I will cut the thing short, but he said, the
statute is aimed at the elementary and indisputable concepts of the
common law about hurting competition. And he built into the rule
of reason, which he announced in that case, a mechanism for evolving the law as economic understanding progresses. That is quite
clear in the legislative history of the Sherman Act. It is quite clear
in the great rule of reason cases, Standard Oil and American To­bacco.
That is all I have said on this subject, that as economic understanding progresses the law just evolve. Senator METZENBAUM. I will come back to that, possibly, later.
But I want to talk with you before I conclude today about large
corporate mergers. Today we meet here with an unprecedented
wave of mergers. And from your writings I get the impression that
this greater concentration of power in large corporations does not
disturb you. It disturbs this Senator and I think it disturbs many people in
this country. In fact, you have written that such trends are desirable and should be allowed to continue until there are only two companies. That is the "Antitrust Paradox" at page 205 and 206, your
book on this subject. I quote: "We are in an area of uncertainty when we ask whether
mergers that would concentrate a market to only two firms of
roughly equal size should be prohibited. My guess is they should
not. And therefore, that mergers up to 60 or 70 percent of the
market should be permitted." From this I can only conclude that you would look favorably on a
merger which left only two firms in the oil industry or the airline
industry, the food industry or any other industry. I think at one
point you said that maybe there ought to be three, but it does not
matter to me whether it is two or three. Judge BORK. Or four. Senator METZENBAUM. YOU did say two, but the fact is, you
would accept total concentration of economic power in just a couple
of companies, maybe three, depending upon which day you were
writing, and I am not questioning that point. But the point that
bothers me is, competition is so vital to this free enterprise system,
as I said earlier, and if we were to follow your line of reasoning
there will not be any competition in this country because two companies will not effectively compete against each other. It will sort
of be a laissez-faire approach where they will let each do their own
thing.I would like to get your views on that.
Judge BORK. Yes, Senator. My views—I was arguing what the
evidence showed about competition in concentrated markets at that time. I do not know if there is additional evidence or not. The
Congress' statutes have been most imprecise about the size of allowable mergers. Section 7 of the Clayton Act, which is the primary statute dealing with mergers, just says, stop it if it may tend
towards a monopoly or to lessen competition. It does not say any­thing about what market share should be allowed.
If you look at the legislative history, you cannot find out what market share should be allowed. If Congress has an economic
theory and says, no fewer than 10, no fewer than 20 firms, that is
fine. I will follow that law. If the economic information—and I do not think Section 7 of the Sherman Act
Senator METZENBAUM. It is what Bork says that concerns me, not what Congress says. Because I am concerned about your position
that two or three companies can control a market and that is ac­ceptable in the free enterprise system.
Judge BORK. I do not think two or three companies can control a market unless they conspire.
Senator METZENBAUM. But they can buy up all of their competi­tors. That is what is happening in America today.
Judge BORK. Well, I think most of those are conglomerate merg­ers, which are a different problem than a horizontal merger.
But if you have three companies in a market and they are not in collusion, it seems to me that the evidence from various industries, some of which I cite in the book, suggests that you get hard compe­tition. If they conspire, you do not. But the structural theory is that.
Now, I do not think section 7 of the Clayton Act is going to allow me—even if I still believe that after I hear more evidence—is going to allow me to say, get down to three.
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge, you say that if you get three com­panies. The fact is, you have six major oil companies in the world
today and you have a lot of competition besides. But give it a one-
cent or two-cent increase in gasoline and they all go up at the same time, and that is just a given.
Now, with three companies and no competition beyond that, or two companies, as you have written, I frankly feel that not only
will the American consumer suffer, but I am convinced that the
American economic system, the free enterprise system, will suffer, and that is really disturbing to me.
Judge BORK. Well, it may be that you are right, Senator, and maybe the evidence will show up. But let me say something about
these companies whose prices all go up at the same time. That happens in the wheat industry. You can have a thousand sellers and
their prices will all go up at the same time. That is because they are responding to the same supply and demand conditions.
You know, if I walked by on a street corner and people are standing there and everyone has an umbrella over his head, if it is not raining, I think there is a conspiracy. If it is raining, I think they are all responding to the same conditions. And I think that is what we are talking about here.
Sure all the oil prices go up about the same time. So do the wheat prices. So do the hamburger prices. But let me say this
Senator METZENBAUM. They tell me my time is up.
Judge BORK. I know, but I want to
Senator METZENBAUM. YOU and I will have further time to dis­cuss this.
Judge BORK. No. I do not want to discuss it anymore. I just want to say one thing. I never suggested that the law would allow just two companies to be left. I may have said I thought two companies would be enough for competition, but I do not think the mood of Congress in passing section 7 of the Clayton Act would allow me to do that.
Senator METZENBAUM. I used your quote on that one.
Judge BORK. Well, I said I thought two companies
Senator METZENBAUM. NOW you are saying, well I suggested that might be all right but I do not really necessarily believe that is the way the law should be.
Judge BORK. I also said that after saying that might be all right economically, I said, in deference to the incipiency concept and the mood of Congress in Section 7 of the Clayton Act, I would have to require more competitors than that. That is all.
Senator METZENBAUM. We will get back to this later.
Judge BORK. All right.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, just for a moment, Mr. Bork mentioned at the end of my round of questioning that he thought my statement of his views on Presidential power was unfair. I want to emphasize, Mr. Chairman, the issue in these hearings is Mr. Bork's views and the points I made were taken directly from Mr. Bork's own words.
Many of us who are concerned about Mr. Bork's views have ques­tioned him about many controversial statements he has made as a professor and a judge. I have compiled a number of these state­ments on various issues and I would like to ask that a compilation that he made be made a part of the record for the hearings, and I am sure as the questioning continues Mr. Bork will have further opportunity to explain these and other statements that he has made on the public record during his career. He will have an op­portunity to explain these later.
The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
The CHAIRMAN. Would you like to say anything? Judge BORK. No. I would just like to have a copy of the state­ments. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection. It is 10 after 1:00. I think we should recess until 2:30. Senator LEAHY. What generally will be the program the rest of the day? I know we are going to have votes, too, on the floor.
The CHAIRMAN. In a moment we will recess until 2:30 and we will finish today with a second round of every Senator who wishes to have a second round, and we will make a judgment as we go.
We will recess until 2:30.
The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order.
Judge, I apologize for these constant interruptions with the votes. I am sorry. It does not happen this way in the circuit court, does it? You guys, and women, can call it when you want it, but we cannot.
Our next questioner is Senator Simpson. Senator Simpson. Senator SIMPSON. Well, Mr. Chairman, here I was here on time. No one was here.
The CHAIRMAN. I want you to know, Senator Simpson, I was here at 2:30 before you walked in, but you were smart enough to vote first, and then come.
Senator SIMPSON. Oh, I did not.  The CHAIRMAN. Or did you miss that vote? Senator SIMPSON. I sure as hell have not. The CHAIRMAN. Oh, you have not voted? Senator SIMPSON. I came from outside the building, walking,
gathering my thoughts. You are going to have to carry on, Mr.
Chairman, all by yourself. The CHAIRMAN. Okay. Well, Judge The CHAIRMAN. Judge, I have a number of questions, but I do not
think it is appropriate for me to start, again, since my colleagues are—we are going to do this in some order. But let's you and I talk for just a minute about the schedule here.
I would like very much to not keep you long today. I know you are willing to stay as long as we want, but I just think it is unfair to keep you on well into the evening tonight. But I would like very much to try to finish up tomorrow.
Judge BORK. I share your attitude, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. And I suspect that you might also. So what we will try to do today is—as we get Senator Simpson back here—is try to get three, maybe four more people. The problem I have is that Mr. Shevardnadze is here and is going to brief all Senators, and obviously that is an important matter.
I am not sure, until my colleagues get back, what their wish will be, whether to continue with a questioner while Shevardnadze is here. We will make that judgment when they get back.
But if we went with four more people today, that would leave
four for a second round tomorrow, and you do not have to answer
now, but I would like you to consider maybe starting a little earlier
tomorrow morning, maybe start at 9:30, 9:00 o'clock even, I do not
know. Judge BORK. Mr. Chairman, if there is a chance of finishing tomorrow, I would be glad to start at 9:00 o'clock, 9:30. The CHAIRMAN. It is my strong desire to finish tomorrow. As the
witnesses, all witnesses have—we have had them changing their
schedule, and it is my intention now to begin Monday morning
with the first witness being the American Bar Association. Again, it will depend on how long we go here. But as your staff
can tell you, when I queried the Senators, those who are strongly
for you, and those who are who are not, all of them said they
wanted to ask more questions. So I am not sure that might not dissipate after this second round
is over, but I will try not to keep you beyond 5:30 today and it may
be we break as early as 4:30. But is that agreeable with you? Judge BORK. That is very agreeable, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. What we will do is, rather than you and I, or me
carrying on this travelogue here, we will recess until Senator Simpson gets back, and he is a Wyoming cowboy, he has long strides
and he ought to be back here, shortly. So we will recess to the call of the Chair, which I expect will be
about 5 to 7 minutes. The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order.
Senator Simpson. Senator SIMPSON. Well, Mr. Chairman, I now know where everybody was, and although I did not hear the bell, at least I saw the
light, later, after nearly too late, and so I thank you. Well, I must say before I begin my remarks, that I at least think
this is appropriate for me. I want to say, right now, that our Chairman has been ultimately fair, not only in these hearings, but in everything I have done with him in my 9 years in the U.S. Senate.
He is very able, very candid, very accommodating, very helpful,
and very courteous to me, as a member of the majority, or the minority. I do not know where all this stuff will go with regard to your
present situation. Hang on tight. You have at least had the guts to
throw yourself in the public arena to run for the presidency, and
that is better than a lot of faint-hearted detractors will ever do in
this world, and they will be the ones who will be trying to sully
you, and pull you down, and so, more power to you as you grapple
with that one. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. Senator SIMPSON. NOW I was interested this morning by members
of the panel discussing things with Judge Bork. I still am puzzled
how we can rag around that one on the decision, the Court decision
on Watergate, when it was vacated, and I do not know how much
more you could really milk that one.
A vacated court decision is just that—null, void, repealed, out the
window, gone. And that is what was proven to be so. And then I
really do not know how, really, we can blame every social ill upon you that has befallen our country in these last years, and I think
that that is easily perceived for what it is.
I personally want to tell you, I do not think you were responsible
for the Vietnam War. I want to tell you that, and I feel that
deeply.
Or every failure of the marketplace. Capitalism's little ups and
downs, I am not going to lay at your feet.
So, I think we should kind of keep our eye on the rabbit here,
that we are trying to confirm a Supreme Court Justice, and we are
doing that, and very seriously so, and I say that on behalf of all of
us.
It has been very interesting to me to hear some rather stirring
discussions, very academic discussions from various members of the
panel.It is as much of a revelation as almost being back in law school,
and hearing the debate of the sharpest kid in the class with the
sharpest professor in the class, and I say that on behalf of my colleagues, because on both sides of the aisle, these are some superb
lawyers.So that has been interesting. Some of it has been rather arcane, I
might add, I have thought. It is not really going to replace anyone's
diet of viewing fare, in my mind, but the American people are
hearing and listening, and judging, judging you on how you handle
the questions, some very pungent, some very absurd, some very appropriate, some very inappropriate. What has kind of been interesting to me is how we are judging
things you did by how we feel in America now, and not how people
felt about America then, and that is so easy to do. These are different times than they were in 1964, at the time of
the Civil Rights Act. Different times than when the debate went on
in the Senate. And the ultimate of different times has been mentioned here two
or three times—the extraordinary situation of the removal of the
Japanese-Americans to camps in the United States. That has been
mentioned here several times. Today, the House will pass that bill. I am a co-sponsor of that
bill, and even though the intimacy of the camp has never been a
part of my background, the intimacy of living next to it was, in
Cody, Wyoming. One of the largest camps was Heart Mountain relocation center. I was a young man, a boy scout, and went out to
visit the boy scout troop with the camp and behind wire were boy
scouts, which was rather puzzling to me, who were American citizens, who wore the same scout uniform, had the same merit
badges, told the same stories, rich tapestry of stories. That is where I met Norm Mineta first. He was behind the wire
there at Heart Mountain. That was a different time, and that was
done by a man who spent a lifetime atoning for it. Earl Warren.
He signed the order. He was attorney general of California. And
then the Warren Court became the most progressive in the land.
I cannot help but think that that was a goad to him in his years
on the bench. Anyway, it happened, and the Supreme Court of the
United States embraced it, and I believe you referred to it as one of
the most shocking—I cannot recall—anyway, you said that was an
extraordinary decision, appalling decision. But nevertheless, it was a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court, and that I think is indicative
of the fact that we were at war, and things were happening off our
coast. We were told that there were submarines out there sending
signals to people on shore who were going to do things to us in America.
You see, all of that escapes us in this process. The full scope of it is not there. And yet, as I say, I am a co-sponsor of that bill. We
have things to do, and we will do them. But it is a sensitive issue.
It was a sensitive issue in my hometown, because, you know, on the
door it would say, "My son has been killed." And then other people
would say "we want to open our hearts to these American citizens." It was a very confusing thing for this kid, at the age of thir­teen.
But the civil rights legislation. You know, your writings on the civil rights legislation were not one whit different than some of Bill
Fulbright's, Sam Ervin's, John Sparkman—vice presidential candidate of the United States of America on the Democratic ticket—
saying the same things you were. The same about, you know, this
is puzzling, you own a private establishment, are you not able to
judge who you will allow in it? We are not talking about race. Ev­erybody says "ah, you are, don't give us that."
So it was interesting, to me, to go back and look at the record of the voting, and especially an amendment from a man that all of us
in the Senate refer to as Mr. Constitution. Sam Ervin. A marvelous
man. It was my pleasure to know him during his lifetime, and to share a few rich stories with him. That was a delight.
He had an amendment to the civil rights legislation which pro­vided that nothing in the title should be construed as requiring any
person to render any personal service to another against his will.
Pretty heavy stuff. Twenty-one people voted for that in the U.S. Senate. Some are here.
Sam Ervin had another one about covered establishments. He got 19 votes on that one. Sparkman had an amendment to exempt
from coverage eating establishments located within the residence
of the owner or proprietor. That was the vice presidential candidate of the United States, I am speaking of. Twenty-five voted for that one.
That is called reality, I think. And not one of these people who were involved, and who sit with us presently in our midst, are any lesser people for anything they did on this.
So what is the test on you, that makes this so impossible as an argument, when here we have men who voted on that issue? All
you did was write on it, and a lot of people wrote on it. Democrats,
Republicans, conservatives and liberals wrote on it in 1963. Nobody
would be writing on it today, but we are not talking about today.
That is just the way it is.
Then, of course, I went back and looked at what you have talked
about the Bakke case, and you get flack of all kinds on that. I have
heard that rattling off the walls here, about what you did on affirmative action, and it is an extraordinary attack on you that
seems continual in its drum fire about civil rights. You handled
that beautifully.
I do not know what more you can do. I mean, while they have
been talking, you have been voting with your decisions.
I was interested in the quote from the Congressional Record in 1964 of the Senate debate. This quote. Contrary to the allegations of some opponents of this title, there is nothing in it that would give any power to the commission, or to any other court to require hiring, firing, or promotion of employees in order to meet a racial quota, or to achieve a certain racial balance. Title VTI is designed to encourage hiring on the basis of ability, and qualifications, not race nor religion. That bugaboo has been brought up a dozen times. It is non­existent.
That was Hubert Humphrey that said that. Hubert Humphrey said that about that bill. And then he said, too, is simply what the bill does—as was pointed out so earlier today—is simply to make it illegal, an illegal practice to use race as a factor of denying employ­ment.
It provides that men and women shall be employed "on the basis of their qualifications, not as Catholic citizens, not as Protestant citizens, not as Jewish citizens, not as colored citizens"—the use of that term offensive in itself these days—"but only as citizens of the United States."
Then—and I am quoting again from Hubert Humphrey— nothing in the bill or in the amendments requires racial quotas. The bill does not provide that people shall be hired on the basis of being Polish or Scandinavian, or German, or Negro—another phrase that is not used in the vernacular of our day— or members of a particular religious faith. It provides that employers shall seek and recruit employees on the basis of their talents, their merit, and their qualifications for the job. The employer, not the Gov­ernment, will establish the standards.
Those are quotations of Hubert Humphrey in the 1964 debate of the Civil Rights law. So I think, you know, really, I do not think we really have to muck around in that much more.
I am sure you have thought a lot about the Indiana Law Journal article. It comes to you in the night, doesn't it? I do not think any­body has ever quoted from the first two paragraphs of it, and I think that is disturbing. Because what you said there, in this arti­cle, in the Indiana Law journal—it said:
A persistently disturbing aspect of constitutional law is its lack of theory, a lack which is manifest not only in the work of the courts but in the public.
And then you go on to say—and I never heard anybody bring this up. "The remarks that follow do not, of course, offer a general theory of constitutional law. They are more properly viewed as ranging shots"—you have had a few ranging shots back on the arti­cle, and I am sure that is probably why you wrote it, after getting to know you.
"They are more properly viewed as ranging shots, an attempt to establish the necessity for theory, and to take the argument of how constitutional doctrine should be evolved by courts a step or two further." That is what you said.
Nobody has brought that up. And then you said—and this is all on the first page. I have heard page 18 quoted, page 22 quoted, page 30, but I have never heard anything on the first and last page, which it seems to me that most people would get the flavor of a literary piece, or a law review article.
And you went on to say, quote:
The style is informal since these remarks were originally lectures, and I have not thought it worthwhile to convert these speculations and arguments into a heavily researched, balanced, and thorough presentation, for that would result in a book.
Unquote.
And then it goes on to say that the article was delivered in the spring of 1971 by Professor Bork as part of the Addison C. Harris lecture series at the University of Indiana School of Law.
At the end of the article you made another statement. One sen­tence. "These remarks are intended to be tentative and exp-lorato­ry."
Now, I do not think we can work the rubric of the ages around that kind of thing. It is a good provocative piece. You found that out.
Did you ever stop to think—at least it came to me—that you know what could be really chilling in this country, especially for candidates for the judiciary, or young lawyers, or judges, or law review editors flapping their wings? You know what could really be chilling? If people dug our articles like this 20 or 30 years after you had done them, or ten, and said, "Look at this." That is what they are doing with it, nothing more.
I cannot imagine anything more chilling on the flow of free thought and theorizing, and ideas, than to pick up an article which
is just that, and described as that, and hang it around your neck like a layaliere for the rest of your life.
That is really bizarre, in my mind. So, as we talk about "chill­ing"—I love that phrase—it depends on where it hurts, and every­thing is chilling—chilling this and chilling that. Well, that is a pretty good chiller, right there, on some young man who is going to be asked to do a law review article and make it provocative.
That is what happened to Pat Wald. She was asked to do a pro­vocative article on the rights of a child and the family relationship, a child of 12 or 13, and it was a remarkable piece. Well, I tell you: that remarkable lady took the slings and arrows of outrageous for­tune on that one.
And so I just wanted to comment on some of those things. Those things means something to me because they are topical. You could talk about the right to privacy, and then for me to learn that it was a law professor's exercise on that contraception case in Con­necticut; nothing had ever been brought about it, and then they fi­nally nailed the doctor who was selling such devices, and it went to the Supreme Court. It did not look like that to me when I was practicing law in Cody, Wyoming. I thought it was pretty heavy stuff. But now I see it was kind of a pedantic exercise, kind of something to stretch the wings of professors, or something. And often, I have found in my life that professors sometimes blur the line between divinity and tenure. And that is one of the charges against you.
How do you feel about that one? You know, they think Judge
Bork is arrogant. That has been said. How do you respond to that?
Judge BORK. Senator, I never have thought of a way to respond to that, except to say "I do not understand why you say that."
Senator SIMPSON. Why not? Obviously
Judge BORK. NO. I am not speaking to you, Senator. No. I do not know how to disprove a statement like that. People have argued
385
with me, and when they were right—I think the most important
thing is to follow your mind and your logic and the evidence where
it goes. And sometimes, people argue with you, and you change your mind. I do not know if that is arrogance or not.
Senator SIMPSON. Well, certainly, anyone who has listened to you in these last 2 days has no fault with your mind or your articulate
ability and your intelligence. That is extraordinary, and that is very obvious.
But again, those are interesting things as we get into all the stuff of cases and case law and who did this to what, and what the
meaning was of the non-unanimous decision written in 1981 or
1982; it is just kind of unique. And then the right to privacy—and I
do not know much more to develop on that. I think, hopefully, that has been developed.
As to that case and what you said, I was just interested—you talk about the right to privacy in topical terms—I was startled at a
very small clipping, which I have never heard anybody comment on yet, and I throw it out and will move on to my questions.
It was in a kind of a gossip column of one of the local papers in July, during the time of the Oliver North hearing. It was written
in a flippant style, and it said something about Oliver North, after
long days before the Iran-Contra Committee, can apparently come
home now to tapes of this performance. Get this, "No one knows
for sure if he is taping all those hours for posterity, but he did buy
a VCR last New Years Eve, from Erol's, in Sterling Park, Virginia,
and just 3 weeks ago had a repair technician in to see that the machine was in proper working order." "Interestingly"—I am quot-
ing—"Erol's has no record in its computers that North or his wife
is a member of the video rental club, or that he has ever rented a
movie there. And to think of all those John Wayne movies he could
be watching." You know, that is funny—but that ain't funny at all.
We talk about the right to privacy. Well, I do not know how
many in this room would like to have the newspaper go and check
through Erol's or Freddy's Video, and find out what they are
checking out down there when you go to get the tape, and you tell
them you got one on bird-watching, and it is about a red-headed, double-breasted mattress-thrasher. 
So, if we really are talking about privacy in September of 1987, we ought to be paying a lot more attention to that little item in the
newspaper than anything in the case of Griswold. That is my humble and earnestly-held opinion.
God, I have been waiting a long time to drop that one. But really, that is very perplexing. I do not know how it is for the rest
of my fellow lawyers, but it is so for this lawyer. That is one of the
most offensive things I can imagine, to know that a reporter can
get to go down and go through your videotape rental records, wherever you are in the United States, and not pretend that is not a most offensive kind of conduct.
And I have often said if there had been four FBI agents hanging out in that house, watching Gary Hart, we would be reading about
it yet. But they were not; they were members of the fourth estate.
So you know, there is an arrogance all around here, I think. And
then, just to be terribly topical, this morning, I see that the gentleman who said that you were an agnostic—where is that lovely little thing—he said
Judge BORK. He is a friend of mine, Senator.
Senator SIMPSON. 1 know, I know; that is not the issue. I have got lots of friends who do me in; it is my enemies I have got to watch. 
You said that he used that word—nobody else had used that word—interesting, how interesting—and then he said, "I am com­fortable with that." I do not know the gentleman, but I think that is a kind of arrogance.
We do it; I do it; you do it; they do it. So you know, it is the judg­ing that always galls me, the judging of our colleagues by usually those who are not usually untainted.
Oh, the hell with it. That is enough. I have got some questions.
Let me ask you about the death penalty—and I have not heard that come up. How much time do I have, Joe? Senator GRASSLEY. I asked him about the death penalty. Senator SIMPSON. Yes. I just want to ask one other thing about
that.
I do not know if you put it on a constitutional basis, legality of the death penalty and the constitutional basis. Where do you find that in the Constitution? And maybe you answered Chuck Grass­ley, but I did not hear it.
Judge BORK. Well, yes, we discussed it, I think.
Senator SIMPSON. Did you? Okay.
Judge BORK. I argued as Solicitor General—I argued, made an oral argument, and filed briefs as amicus for the United States, in the case that brought the death penalty back after Furman v.Geor­gia. And what you find in the Constitution is not only no prohibi­tion of the death penalty, but you find repeated statements in the Constitution that the framers assumed the availability of the death penalty.
For example, the fifth amendment—"No person shall be held to answer for a capital crime, unless on presentment for indictment of a grand jury." Well, a capital crime is the death penalty.
"Nor shall any person be subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb." If you are put in jeopardy of life, that is the death penalty.
"Nor shall any person be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law." Well, being deprived of life is the death penalty. So the framers tell you that you have to have due process of law, but you can impose the death penalty.
The 14th amendment in 1868: "No State shall deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law." That is the death penalty again.
I think there is one more reference in the Constitution to the death penalty, Senator, but there are four, right there, that assume the availability of the death penalty so far as the Constitution is concerned.
Senator SIMPSON. Let me ask you another question. It was so in­teresting to me, especially in the advertising that swirls around America—and I have not found anybody yet who wants to take re­sponsibility for it; I have talked to some groups who I thought were
387
doing it, and they said, "Oh, we are not responsible for that"—so I have not found anybody yet, because it is offensive, and they have all figured that out. But it is interesting how they stick the word "poll tax" out there as if it were, quote, "racisim"—because that is all they have done. And "poll tax" to the layman out there is racist.
But I think it is important to know that that is not what that case had anything to do with at all; isn't that correct? Judge BORK. That is correct. There was no allegation of racial discrimination of any kind in that case. Senator SIMPSON. Not one. And if there had been, what would you have done?
Judge BORK. If there had been an allegation, and it was proved, the poll tax would be unconstitutional under the equal protection clause of the 14th amendment.
Senator SIMPSON. Let me ask you—I listened this morning as Senator Metzenbaum reviewed antitrust, and that was a law school seminar for me, because Senator Metzenbaum is our pro on anti­trust on this panel, and I know that with your book, the book you wrote on the antitrust paradox, is really probably one of the most respected volumes in that field. And I would like to—in fact, my good friend from Ohio, as I say, who I always take to conference committees with me, at least when I was in the majority—I hope he will take me with him on a few now that I am in the minority— he said, "I am familiar with your views with respect to antitrust legislation, antitrust enforcement, and you and I are totally in dis­agreement on that subject." And that is Howard Metzenbaum; he lets you know where he is coming from.
Then he said, "However, as I said at the time Justice O'Connor was up for confirmation"—this was on her—"the fact that my views might differ from hers on any one of a number of different issues would not in any way affect my judgment as pertains to con­firmation or failure to confirm a member of the Judiciary." Others have made those statements, and I think that they are important, and they are known.
But I think that I want to enter into the record, Mr. Chairman, a letter from the law firm of Shearman & Sterling of New York
Judge BORK. Senator, I know which letter, because I have a copy of it. It is not from the law firm of Shearman & Sterling. It is from a particular member of that firm, and it states the views of 17 past chairmen of the ABA committee on antitrust. But I do not want to get the law firm involved in this.
Senator SIMPSON. NO; all right. I agree with that. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, the letter will be placed in the record.
Senator SIMPSON. SO it is from the individual member of the firm, a Mr. James T. Halverson of the firm. He is a past chairman of the section of antitrust law, and he is commenting upon an arti­cle by Colman McCarthy, which was rather strident, on July 12th of 1987, stating that your views on antitrust law were, quote, "over the edge," unquote, and anti-consumer.
He writes on his behalf and on behalf of all of the previous chair­men of the section—and I think there were 15—who take issue with that and state that your book is among the most important works written in this field in the past 25 years; referred to by the
U.S. Supreme Court and by the U.S. Court of Appeals in 75 deci­sions since its publication; six of the nine present Justices have cited Judge Bork's work, and that all of them have joined opinions citing it.
I think that is what we want to get into the record from people who are totally knowledgeable in the field, and they say that Mr. McCarthy is also quite wrong in his suggestion that your leaning, writings, are anti-consumer.
So I would like that entered into the record, and I think that is a very important thing for people to know—the full statement.
The CHAIRMAN. The full statement has been put in the record.
Senator SIMPSON. Yes, the entire letter, please, Mr. Chairman.
Well, I see I have 2 minutes, so Mr. Chairman, I might respect­fully request—I do not know what your scheduling is—but that we might have another round. I think there are several of us who would like—and I went too long, admittedly so—it will not be me; I will be asking questions, I promise. But I think it would be good to maybe, hopefully, do that. We could limit the time, perhaps, but I am in my last minute now, and I do have some other question I would have liked to have asked with regard to the Vice President Agnew situation, where the judge made a determination with the Vice President which was different from the one he made with the President, and it has an explanation—a little bit more on that— and a little review of the list. I would like to kind of review the list, where this man has voted so many times to protect minorities and women—and I have the citations, and I do not want to just enter them into the record.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
The CHAIRMAN. I can assure the Senator that he will have every opportunity, as every Senator will here, to ask any questions he has. The fact is that we have had on both sides of the aisle here a deep interest in continuing to pursue these questions, and every Senator will have a chance to do that. Hopefully, those questions will expire by the end of tomorrow, but we will not cut people off.
Senator DeConcini.
Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Judge Bork, I had to leave the Appropriations Committee and a
few other things—I was chairing a subcommittee there—to go to a markup, and I was not here for all of your answers this morning, although I was here when you responded to Senator Thurmond re­garding the equal protection discussion that we had yesterday as it relates to gender and as it relates to racial discrimination, and it was helpful. I must say that after yesterday I was very concerned. I still have a couple of points, if I could get to them, and you may
want to clarify anything that you said yesterday.
First, let me just clarify this, Judge. You have stated that you
now believe that the fourteenth amendment, the equal protection
clause, applies to women. There is no question about that, is there,
anymore?Judge BORK. None; it applies to everybody. Senator DECONCINI. It applies to everybody. Fine. Okay. So, now
that we accept that basis, is it still correct that in the interview
that you did just less than 3 months ago, you stated in that interview—and that is this one of July 10th, 1987—are you familiar
with that—the United States Information Agency Judge BORK. I do not recall it particularly. Maybe there is a copy
around here someplace. Senator DECONCINI. Yes. Can someone give the Judge a copy of
this? Okay.Judge, what bothers me about that is down at the bottom of that
page where the paperclip is—and I do not want to take this out of
context at all. You stated there, "I do not think the equal protection clause probably should have been kept to things like race and
ethnicity." Judge BORK. Ethnicity, yes. Senator DECONCINI. Yes. Is that your position? Judge BORK. NO. This goes back to the discussion we had, Senator, about if you are going to do it by groups, then I think the
groups they were primarily talking about were racial groups and
ethnic groups.However, if you do not do it by groups, but do it by all persons
on a reasonable basis test, which I think is closer to the language
of the amendment, then everybody is included. And you see what I
was leading up to, which is on the next page. Senator DECONCINI. Yes. I saw that. Judge BORK. In that speech I was referring to a case which I
frankly thought was a little odd. That was a case about—I forget; it
was Idaho, I think—but it had a law that in order to drink 3.2 beer,
a man had to be 21, but a woman could be 18 years of age. And I
said I thought that was to trivialize the Constitution in a way.
They produced six opinions in that case about whether you could
have a different drinking age for men and women for 3.2 beer. You
would have thought it was the steel seizure case the way they went
at it. And I thought, as a matter of fact, the differential drinking
age probably is justified, because they have statistics on Senator DECONCINI. But you would not—in your rational or reasonable test there, that would not fall into this area, that particular law
Judge BORK. NO, no; you would examine it. Senator DECONCINI. YOU would examine it. Judge BORK. But they had evidence that there was a problem
with young men drinking more than there was with young women
drinking. Now, I do not know if the evidence was good. You would
have to examine it. But they had that evidence.
That law was preferential to women, by the way, Senator.
Senator DECONCINI. Yes, I understand that. It does not make too
much difference from the standpoint of what we are talking about.
Judge BORK. No, I know that, but from the standpoint of people saying that I disfavor women, this is a case in which I was
Senator DECONCINI. I understand.
Judge BORK. They had a lot of evidence about differential drink­ing patterns and resultant troubles, automobile accidents and so forth, upon which they based that differential.
Senator DECONCINI. But based on that particular case. Let us just go back to that case for a moment. Based on that case, you do not believe that that rational standard or reasonable standard would apply or you do?
Judge BORK. Oh, no, the standard applies. The question is wheth­er there is a reasonable basis for having a differential drinking age of 3 years. Now, maybe there is; maybe there isn't.
Senator DECONCINI. YOU don't have an opinion on that case?
Judge BORK. NO. I would have to look at the evidence in the case. They got into some statistics. Statisticians tell me they didn't handle the statistics very well.
Senator DECONCINI. Let me go to a couple of other cases. Senator Thurmond questioned that your form of reasonable basis analysis would follow where the Supreme Court is now, but without having to group people into categories, if I understand it.
Now, you cited the unanimously decided REED case of 1971 as one of the Supreme Court decisions that you support, is that correct?
Judge BORK. Yes, that's correct.
Senator DECONCINI. NOW, what about some of the post-Reed cases like the Craig v. Boren case where you stated, quote, when the Supreme Court decided that having different drinking ages for young men and young women violated the equal protection clause, I thought that was trivializ­ing the Constitution and to spread it to areas it did not address.
Now, taking that case, I have a problem, Judge. Where are you? Justice Powell, Stewart and Stevens, who you've cited here quite a bit, stated and Justice Powell stated in his concurring opinion,
This gender-based classification does not bear a fair and substantial relation to the object of the legislation.
Now, I am trying to find out where you draw the line in your
reasonable test, and I have not found that out, and if you could
help me in a few words, it would be helpful. Let me go ahead and
give you two more cases and then you can answer all three of them and maybe I can understand it.
Let me give you a couple of cases using what I consider the strict or the higher level of scrutiny struck down. The statutes in question which I am going to give you here are which, under the basis
of violating equal protection clause. Yet the dissent in these cases
said the rational basis test should have been used and the statute
should have been upheld. One is the Frontiero v. Richardson case,
if you are familiar with that case, a 1973 case. Under the statute a
serviceman could claim his wife as a dependent for the purpose of
obtaining increased living allowance, medical and dental benefits
without regard to whether she was, in fact, dependent upon him or
any part of her support was dependent upon him. But a service
woman may not claim a husband as a dependent for such purposes
unless he could prove that half of his support was dependent on her. Now, that case was decided 8 to 1 with Rehnquist writing the
dissent. Now, another case very near to that is Kaban v. Muhammed
1979. Under that statute, a mother but not the father of an illegimate child could block the adoption of a child by withholding the
consent. Now, that was a 4 to 5 decision with Justice Powell writing that.Now, comparing these two cases and comparing that rational test
that was applied to both of these cases, I understand these cases
that the dissent used that rational, quote, "reasonable" test which
you said is that you used, as I understand it correctly and is your
view of the rational basis test different from the dissenters in these
two cases or is that what it is, and if it is, I understand it. It
doesn't throw you out of the Supreme Court as far as I'm concerned. What I want to know is where you are. Judge BORK. I think, Senator, didn't my office and I defend the
distinction in Frontierd? I think we had to because I think it was a
congressional statute we were defending. Senator DECONCINI. Did your office defend it? You mean, when
you were Solicitor? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator DECONCINI. I don't know, sir. Judge BORK. Well, I think maybe we did. But anyway, no Senator DECONCINI. I mean, is that relevant? Judge BORK. NO. Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Judge BORK. I am just curious. Senator DECONCINI. Fine. I would be glad to find out. Judge BORK. NO. I can find out. There is a casebook around here. Senator DECONCINI. I can, too, and I will be glad to find out and
let you know. Judge BORK. It is not really relevant. Well, I can't tell from that
whether I did or not. It just gives a date. Senator DECONCINI. Yes. Well, I am sorry I don't know the
answer to that. Judge BORK. NO, it doesn't matter. I shouldn't have raised it. But, no, you can use heightened scrutiny, intermediate scrutiny
and lower scrutiny, or you can use the reasonable basis test. Senator DECONCINI. NOW, let me ask you there, the reasonable
basis test doesn't fall in any of those three in your judgement? Judge BORK. NO. It is a different methodology. Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Judge BORK. And people who use heightened scrutiny on a particular case may come out different ways. People who use intermediate scrutiny may come out different ways. It is a matter of judgement.
Similarly, people who use the reasonable basis test may come out
different ways. You know, it is like original intent. That doesn't
give you a mechanical answer. What it does is get you into where
you are starting from. That is all.
So the people who use, if they use rational basis or whatever
they called it in Frontiero and
Senator DECONCINI. Rational basis is what they used?
395
Judge BORK. Yes.
Senator DECONCINI. The dissent used the rational basis?
Judge BORK. Kaban or whatever it is, that is probably—you know, you could use the same thing and disagree with them. Now, I think in Frontiero, or at least as you described Kaban—I don't know the case—the mother but not the father could block the adoption, that doesn't sound on the face of it very reasonable.
But, you know, I shouldn't be saying that because I haven't ex­amined all the facts.
Senator DECONCINI. SO I did misunderstand you yesterday. I gathered yesterday that your reasonable standard on cases involv­ing sex discrimination, gender discrimination was similar to the ra­tional basis. That is not the case?
Judge BORK. NO. NO, it is not the lowest level of scrutiny.
Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Now, is the reasonable standard test a fourth test? Judge BORK. It is an entirely different methodology. Senator DECONCINI. We are talking about heightened, intermediate, rational, and now reasonable?
Judge BORK. NO, it is an entirely different methodology. Instead of saying what degree of scrutiny is this group entitled to when a statute disadvantages them, it asks, is the differentiation made, the disadvantage made reasonable in light of a valid governmental pur­pose?
Now, for example, I would think as far as gender is concerned you could get, using a reasonable basis test, results at least as fa­vorable to women as you would using intermediate scrutiny. Be­cause in our society, that is, as it has evolved—and I made a point in one of my decisions, the Oilman case, of saying that as society evolves constitutional doctrine will change, but it changes in cer­tain ways.
The kinds of distinctions between men and women that are now allowable because reasonable are almost entirely based upon bio­logical differences and whether the particular
Senator DECONCINI. Isn't that the same as rational? Judge BORK. YOU know, I don't know if it is the same as rational or not, but I am telling you the level at which I apply it.
Are almost entirely based upon biological differences, and there are only a few things in life as to which a biological difference makes a difference.
Senator DECONCINI. Otherwise, you would apply the intermedi­ate or the strict interpretation, or test standard?
Judge BORK. I was trying to get away from the—as Justice Ste­vens did, and I think I like his position better—I was trying to get away from a methodology under which each group has its own level of scrutiny. Because I remember teaching this stuff in law school, and at one point we had 2Vz levels or 3Vfe levels of scrutiny, and I think it becomes highly artificial.
I think it is better to look at it and say this law makes a distinc­tion, does it make any sense? There was a time in this country when the distinction made in Frontiero, that is, we will assume that a woman is a dependent and a man is not, might have made some sense. That was a time when women were not in the market396
place. So that they would have to prove that they were in the mar­ketplace.
That distinction now makes no sense because women are heavily into the marketplace, into careers, and so forth. Hence, the result in Frontiero follows.
Senator DECONCINI. But, in Frontiero, the facts are that Rehn­quist used the rational basis test.
Judge BORK. I think he is probably—as I recall his cases and his testimony here before this committee, I think he is using this multi-tiers of analysis, strict scrutiny—he is using rational basis as the third and lowest level of scrutiny in these tiers. I am not even in that game, and neither is Justice Stevens.
Senator DECONCINI. SO, you are not going to take to the Court, if
you are confirmed, this three tiers? Judge BORK. NO. Senator DECONCINI. YOU are going to take one tier? Both as to
gender discrimination cases and race discrimination cases? Judge BORK. True. Senator DECONCINI. IS that correct? Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator DECONCINI. SO you won't apply the strict interpretation
to the race discrimination test? Judge BORK. Well, in race Senator DECONCINI. YOU are going to use reasonableness on everything is what you are saying? Judge BORK. Yes. But in race, almost no distinction I can think of is reasonable. Senator DECONCINI. Well, I agree with you vis-a-vis you would
use the strict interpretation, or the strict standard. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator DECONCINI. But maybe it is semantics. Okay, let me go to something else, Judge. And that is helpful.
Let me say, also, I appreciate the time you have spent with this committee and the forthrightness that you have displayed over the last few days. As we talked before you came here for the actual confirmation hearing, you have been forthcoming and it has made a great deal of difference to me because of the circumstances sur­rounding your nomination. Not you personally, just because of the circumstances of why we are here.
I am very concerned, Judge Bork, about the activism, charges of and my belief of overactivism on the Court today, and then I scruti­nize a number of judges who have sat on the Court who are in the conservative column, and they seem to have some activism, too.
And you certainly have been very critical of the Supreme Court, and some of the opinions you have written and gone into, I want to review one because I want you to explain what activism is to you and does it apply to you when you expound on a case.
I want to turn your attention to Finzer v. Barry. I want to ac­knowledge that the Supreme Court has granted certiorari in the case, and that it would be improper for you to comment on any aspect of the issues presented by that case, so I am not going to try to do that.
397
The question that I do have is how do you go about in determining the framers' intent, and is that activism as you explain that?
And let me read you some of the opinion. In that opinion you state:
The framers understood that the protection to foreign embassies from insult was one of the central obligations of the law of nations. It is also clear that the Founders who explicitly gave Congress the power to enforce adherence to the standards of the law of nations, which they understood well, saw no incompatibility between the na­tional interest and any guaranteed individual freedom.
I find this to be an interesting quote. It almost is—well, let me
say this. When a decision, in your opinion, calls for an analysis of
the framers' intent, I want to know how you come to that in lieu of
this case. In this particular decision you did a thorough and long overview
of threats to embassies and how governments attempted to protect
them. You cited "Blackstone's Commentaries," a letter written by
Millard Fillmore in 1851, an article written on the law of the nations in 1863, an incident in Philadelphia in 1902 in which a foreign flag was burned and no one was prosecuted, a U.S. Attorney
General's opinion in 1794 that says the law of libel is strengthened
in the case of foreign ministers because the law of nations secures
a minister from insult, and a 1779 resolution by the Continental
Congress urging that the right of ambassadors be protected. This process seems to me a very laborious process that you went
through, and I enjoyed reading it, I must say, for the history involved in it—for you to go through to arrive at your decision that
"it is also clear that the founders who explicitly gave Congress the
power to enforce adherence to the standards of the law of nations,
which they understood well, saw no incompatibility between this
national interest and any guaranteed individual freedom." How would you respond to the statement, when you are a non-
activist and a strict interpretationist, if you want to call it that, or
believe in the original intent that we have discussed here for 2 or 3
days—how do you rationalize this long historical basis for your decisions that seem to go far away from the original intent?
Judge BORK. May I have the page number there, Senator? Senator DECONCINI. The page of the case? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator DECONCINI. Just a minute, and I will get it for you. I will
get you the case, I think. Judge BORK. I am trying to understand why you think I departed from the original intent, because I thought that is what I was talking about, for the most part. Senator DECONCINI. It is on page 1457. Judge BORK. Let me say one other thing, Senator, about activism
and result orientation. As you and I know, but not all our listeners
may, "result orientation" is a term of art that we judges use describing some judges methods for judging a case, in which a judge
would pay more attention to results than legitimate reasoning.
The people in this case who brought the lawsuit and whom I
ruled against were conservatives who wanted to go out and speak
and pray, and congregate in front of the Soviet and the Nicaraguan
embassies. So when I ruled against them, it was not exactly an
action of a conservative activist. And what I did—by the way
86-974 0 - 89 - 15
Senator DECONCINI. But on the other hand, it supported the Government's position, that the Government wanted Judge BORK. This Congress' position. This Congress passed the
statute Senator DECONCINI. And who signed the statute? I assume it is
the law of the land, right? Judge BORK. Pardon me? Senator DECONCINI. It is the law of the land. Judge BORK. That is right. Senator DECONCINI. I mean, it is not just the Congress. Judge BORK. That is right. The President signed the statute. But
I mean, this statute was framed Senator DECONCINI. All right. Go ahead. Judge BORK. by Congress, and enacted, and the only question
was is it constitutional. It prevents people from carrying placards,
as I recall, offensive to a foreign embassy within 500 feet, or congregating there. And it has therefore both aspects. One is the
aspect of protecting the security of the embassy, and we had affidavits about the difficulty—if we allow people right up close to the
embassy, it becomes almost impossible for the police to protect the
security of the embassy—and the aspect of insult to the ambassador and his staff. And that is what Congress had in mind. Those are deeply-rooted in our constitutional tradition. The framers were worried about insult to ambassadors. The Continental
Congress, as you pointed out, was worried about it. In fact, one
reason—not a major reason, but one reason—I think, for a Constitutional Convention was that before the Constitution they had to
rely upon the States to protect ambassadors, and not all the States
would do so, and our foreign relations were in kind of a tangle and
a mess. And therefore in article I, section 8, clause 10, Congress is explicitly given the power to define and punish offenses against the law
of nations. And offenses to ambassadors or dangers to the security
of ambassadors is, of course Senator DECONCINI. Well, my concern, Judge Bork, is that in
your original intent as I understand it, you look to the circumstances when the amendment was passed, the intent of the framers, and here, I am concerned that here you looked at a letter written by Millard Fillmore in 1851, which is certainly not the time of
the amendment Judge BORK. Oh, I see, I see. Senator DECONCINI. the time of the amendment; an article
written on the law of the nations in 1863; an incident in Philadelphia in 1902. What troubles me here is that if you are truly what
you say you are and what I believe you are, more an original intentor than an expansionist, how do you rationalize using this sort of
thing to come to original intent? I just do not follow it, that is all.
And maybe there is a logical thing, because a couple of them, you
do—you go back here to the Continental Congress. That certainly
was in the time when this was coming about, 1779. But these
others really, I just could not figure it out.
Judge BORK. Well, as you point out, Senator, I went down
through all this history about the Continental Congress, about the
old writers, like Batelle, on the law of nations, and a complaint by the British government in 1794 because of a riotous assembly before the house of a foreign council, and the opinion of the Attor­ney General in 1794, and so forth. And I first established that Edmund Randolph and John Jay and so forth, all these people, had these views; and that one of the first things the new Nation did— John Jay subsequently said, "It is of high importance to the peace of America that she observe the law of nations," and the safety and dignity of ambassadors is central to that.
I established that as a matter of original intent. Then, I thought it important to point out that this has been a continuing intellectu­al tradition in the law, right down to the present day, and that is why I went
Senator DECONCINI. SO you used current history, or more current history, to attempt not to go to the original intent, but to substanti­ate that that original intent has been followed; is that what you are saying?
Judge BORK. Yes, yes.
Senator DECONCINI. Okay, okay. I understand it now, because to me, that was quite unclear when I read your articles on original intent, which I did not disagree with in total at all, but then I read this opinion and I said, wait a minute, where does he come out.
Judge BORK. Well, I just want to point out, Senator, that Chief Justice John Marshall, in M'Culloch v. Maryland, not only cited the original meaning of the Constitution, but he brought the prac­tice under the Constitution down to his day to show that that sup­ported his understanding of the original intention.
Senator DECONCINI. We only have a few more minutes here, and then we are going to take a short recess, Judge, and then Senator Grassley, I think, will be up.
Let me go into one more quick area, judicial restraint. It has been stated by some of your supporters that your personal views do not enter into your judicial analysis of the case. In describing the unwelcome heterosexual harassment of a subordinate by a supervi­sor in Vinson v. Taylor, you use casual, sometimes what I would term flippant, words. However, in describing the consequences of a consentual homosexual relationship in the Dronenberg case, you stated—and I want to read it real quickly—
Episodes of this sort are certain to deleterious to morale and discipline, to call into question the even-handedness of superiors dealing with lower ranks, to make personal dealings uncomfortable where the relationship is sexually ambiguous, to generate dislike and disapproval among many who find homosexuality morally of­fensive, and it must be said, given the powers of military supervisors over their infe­riors, to enhance the possibility of homosexual seduction.
Then you go on in that opinion—which I am sure you are familiar with; you did not write it that long ago, and I read it with some
interest—you go on at great length, I think it is about nine pages, explaining this.
In this kind of a case, what brought you to expand and put in what appears to be your philosophy? Is that judicial activism?
What do you call it? Judge BORK. NO, Senator. Do you mean the discussion of the pri­vacy cases? Senator DECONCINI. That is right; yes, sir.
Judge BORK. No, Senator, I do not think so. That case was argued
almost entirely by the attorneys from the privacy cases. They said
that the privacy cases require this result, and they went through
all of the cases I discussed, and pressed it. And that is why I felt in
fairness, I ought toSenator DECONCINI. That is why you answered every one of those
cases? Judge BORK. Yes, I did. Senator DECONCINI. And the Vinson case versus the Dronenberg
case, do you recall the difference in there that you did not answer?
Is that the same reason—they did not cite any privacy in the
Vinson case? Judge BORK. The Vinson case is not a case in that sense. I mean,
I was not on the panel. And this was merely a dissent from a
denial of a petition for rehearing en bane. That is, I never had an
attorney before me or a brief before me. Senator DECONCINI. YOU did not hear any arguments on the
Vinson case Judge BORK. NO, no. What I was saying was that the panel opinion was wrong. And as a matter of fact, although people, I think,
have mischaracterized what happened in the Supreme Court, the
Supreme Court agreed with me on the two important issues in the
case. Senator DECONCINI. SO it is fair to say, going back to the Dronenberg case, that if in the arguments, the briefs before you, if you
were on the Supreme Court, if they did not cite all these privacy
cases because of your judicial restraint that you impose on yourself, you would not yourself embark on such discussions? Judge BORK. Oh, that is entirely true; that is entirely accurate,
Senator. I do not view a court's opinion as a place for a law review
article. Senator DECONCINI. YOU only do that when the cases are specified in the material brought before you; is that what you are
saying?Judge BORK. Yes, except—I should make this qualification. If I
answer the cases, and that sort of brings to mind another argument along that line that might have been made, I may say, "But
that would not help, either." But I would not do it unless it were
germane to the issue at hand, because I do not believe judicial
opinions are the place for writing law review articles. If I want to
do that, I will write a law review article. Senator DECONCINI. Well, when I read the Dronenberg case, I
thought it was a pretty good law review article, quite frankly, on
the privacy, and I mean that as a compliment Judge BORK. Well, it may be. Senator DECONCINI. I read it, but I could not understand why it
was there.
Judge BORK. Oh, that was entirely what the argument was about.
Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is about
up, and I am going to go vote. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Grassley? Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge BORK, once again, this starts my second round of questioning, and I think I ought to begin—can you hear me
Judge BORK. Oh, yes.
Senator GRASSLEY. I want to once again welcome you back before
the committee. I know it is a lot of hard work.
Before I start some questioning, I want to say something that I
think needs to be said. This has been touched on before, but I think
it bears repeating. For about 12 hours now, you have responded to
some of the most intense questioning. You have been under a great
deal of scrutiny, and I think that you have done very well indeed.
But the point I want to make is that I do not think in the history
of the Senate has a nominee been subject to this kind of questioning; and, never has a judicial nominee like you been so forthcoming
in his views. And I hope that I am right when I say that it is my
recollection of history that it was not until 1955 that this committee even made it a practice of questioning Supreme Court nominees
on their views.
So by my count, that would mean that we probably, in the history of our country up to that point, had 90 Supreme Court Justices
serve without such questioning, and many of those 90 served with
distinction. They were approved and then took their place on the
Court without going through any of the formal questioning process
that you are going through.
So I think some perspective is in order. It is to your credit; your
full knowledge of the law; what people watching on television
ought to see as a powerful intellect. And I do not know how anybody can recall such long ago happenings and writings and events
as you do. You have been able to recall quite a bit. I think you
need to be complimented for that.
I believe that you have responded, it seems to me, with candor
and more patience than any Senator would ever have, and obviously more grace than any Senator would have. So thank you very
much.
These inquiries that we have been questioning you about now for
these last 12 hours have covered the full scope of your lifetime in
the Jaw. This involves more than 100 legal opinions that you have
written while you have been on the D.C. Circuit, dozens of law
school review articles that you have written, countless speeches
that you have made, and your Solicitor General briefs. I could go
on and on about what you have drawn on to answer these questions.
Today, we have branched out into some quotes from a 462-page
book on antitrust law that you wrote, I believe, back in 1978. And
make no mistake about it, most of these questions have been tough;
many have been fair. I do not know whether you have former students of yours watching, who would have taken some first-year law
school classes from you; however, they may take some personal
pleasure in seeing a former professor on the receiving end of the
Socratic method.
Two days ago, some people announced that you are a rigid ideologue, with a closed mind on a whole host of legal issues. Just yesterday, some of these same people said that you change your mind
•too much or that, even worse, you have styled your responses to advance your legal career.
Of course, I guess maybe lawyers—and I am not a lawyer, as you recall—may call this "arguing the alternative." In politics, we call it "having it both ways".
What really needs to be said is almost self-evident—that there is no one in this room, particularly those of us in this body, who could withstand the kind of scrutiny that you have, and I just want to take a few minutes out of my half-hour to commend you for that.
Judge Bork, I do not expect you to recall where I left off yester­day, but that is where I want to take up. You and I were in the process of discussing how it is that the Bill of Rights can evolve. As a follow-up of the evolution of rights, does the fact that the applica­tion of the fourth amendment in the 20th century, covering illegal electronic surveillance, or that the first amendment covers the electronic media, tell us that your philosophy allows the Bill of Rights to evolve?
Judge BORK. Yes, it does, Senator. I point out that I wrote exten­sively about that in the Oilman case, and I did so because I was challenged by the dissent, about how can these rules ever change. And I wrote extensively in that case about how rules can evolve in order to protect the original value that the framers wanted to pro­tect, as circumstances and technologies change around us.
Senator GRASSLEY. Could you give me again, then, your general approach to the problem of applying the words of the Constitution to problems that the founders could not have foreseen?
Judge BORK. I think, Senator, one way of putting that is that you look at the founders and the ratifiers, and you look at the text of the Constitution, their words, what it was that was troubling them at the time, why they did this, and you look at the Federalist Papers and the Anti-Federalist Papers and so forth and so on and so on, to get what the public understanding of the time was of what the evil was they wished to avert, what the freedom was they wished to protect. And once you have that, that is your major premise; and then the judge has to supply the minor premise to make sure to ask whether that value, that freedom, is being threat­ened by some new development in the law or in society or in tech­nology today. And then he makes the old freedom effective today in these new circumstances.
That is going to mean changing legal doctrine, evolving legal doc­trine, in order to protect the original value or freedom that the framers and ratifiers of the Constitution wanted to protect.
Senator GRASSLEY. But you have to contrast, then—am I right— the evolution of rights in the Constitution with what you might call the wholesale creation of totally new rights?
Judge BORK. Oh, that is right. The freedom, the value, to be pro­tected by the judge is always the lawmakers, in this case, the ratifi­ers, of the Constitution, and not the judges' values.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, yesterday and again today, I think that you did a very good job of explaining to this committee the very important distinction between the result in a case and the reasoning behind that result. In other words, you may agree with the result as a policy matter, but still quarrel with the reasons sup­porting that result.
I think this is, at least what I sense as the essence of your judi­cial conduct. But I think it is important for us to go over that again and again and again.
Can you explain again to the committee why the reasoning of a court is often more important than the mere result?
Judge BORK. A judge has power over people, and it is important, since he is unelected and probably unrepresentative of the Ameri­can people, it is important that he demonstrate by his reasoning that there is law that he is applying and that he is not applying his personal values or principles. And that is why the reasoning in an opinion is crucial. That is the judge's showing of his warrant to do what he does. That is the only thing a judge has to prove to the public that what he does in this case, and why this person loses, and why the rule is as it is, is a legitimate rule and a legitimate result, because he must show his warrant by reasoning from the Constitution or from the statute.
Senator GRASSLEY. IS the public following the Court's opinions the rationale behind this?
Judge BORK. Yes. I think opinions serve a lot of functions. One, the losing party at least is given a good reason why he or she lost, and that is important, that people to understand that they were heard, and that a reason has been given. It also is a statement to the public that the judge is exercising his or her power legitimate­ly. It is also an essay, in a sense, to other people who may be affect­ed in the future by this area of the law so that they can predict likely developments in the law.
Opinions serve a lot of functions.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, what you say about results on the one hand versus reasoning on the other, to put you in proper perspec­tive, is nothing out of the ordinary, is it?
Judge BORK. NO. I think judges have been saying that since the beginning of the Republic. And Joseph Story, a great Justice and a professor at Harvard Law School at the time, a man who sat on the Supreme Court with Chief Justice John Marshall, wrote a book on the Constitution, and he very clearly states that this is the way you interpret the Constitution. And I am in utter agreement with Jus­tice Story. That is an old and hallowed tradition in the law.
Senator GRASSLEY. In fact, isn't that about the first thing that a new law student learns in law school: the legal reasoning is more important than the mere result?
Judge BORK. Well, I think that is true.
Senator GRASSLEY. Over the past few weeks, I have seen some so-called analyses of your opinions during the period of time that you have been on the D.C. Circuit. These analyses took a look at what would be a fraction of the cases that you participated in, and con­cluded that your vote could be predicted based on the status of the parties in the case. In other words, they said the result in your cases is predictable by identifying the plaintiff and the defendant in the case. Public interest groups, they say, always lose; the Gov­ernment always wins, and on and on and on.
Are you familiar with these studies, done by Ralph Nader's groups and others?
Judge BORK. I have to say—and I hope I do not hurt anybody's feelings, Senator, that I did not read those studies. But I am famil­iar with what they say, and I think that
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, I do not think that matters. I think you can answer my question.
Judge BORK. Oh, sure, sure.
Senator GRASSLEY. Let me ask you to return a minute, if I could, to your days as a law professor—and you were in one of the best law schools in the United States, Yale University. Let me ask you what you think of the legal scholarship of those analyses, even though you did not read them—you read the newspapers and have some idea of what they are talking about.
Judge BORK. Yes, oh, yes, I did. Well, some of them were very strange. I remember one I read about, told about, that classified all my pro-business decisions, and among my pro-business decisions was a decision holding for the labor union against the federal labor relations authority. And they said, well, a labor union is really a business, or something like that, and the categorization really got fairly comical.
And I think the other day—I cannot remember now how it came up—a Senator was pointing out—maybe it was Senator Humphrey, but I am not sure—was pointing out a number of decisions in which I voted for the individual against the corporation or the indi­vidual against the Government. There are lots of cases like that.
I should say, Senator, and I intend to put into the record here, sooner or later—I just keep forgetting to do it—if you look at my decisions on race, on women, on labor unions, on individuals versus the Government, you will find no consistency along those lines. You will find no political axis, no political line along which those decisions line up. They go both ways. They line up only according to legal reasoning.
Senator GRASSLEY. NOW, in my questioning, I am not particularly asking you to defend yourself in the sense of how these analyses have rated you, but I am asking you to look at it as a law school professor from the standpoint of these analyses of you. It seems to me that they probably read the first page, to see who was involved in the case, and then read the last page, to see who won, but con­veniently skip over all the reasoning in-between.
Judge BORK. Well, they conveniently skip over even who the par­ties were, because they say, well, he voted for—I remember there was one criticism about a case. He voted for railroads, against the
ICC. That shows he is pro-business. What they did not mention was that with the ICC was Alcoa, fighting with the railroads.
Now, Alcoa, I suppose, thinks of itself as a business. I think of it as a business. So, how that gets to be a pro-business decision, I do not know. There was business on both sides of that case.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, let me ask you, if one of your students when you were teaching in law school had handed in a paper like that, what kind of a grade would you have given that kind of legal analysis?
Judge BORK. Well, it would not be a passing grade, Senator; it would not be.
405
Senator GRASSLEY. I take it that you are willing to let your spot­less record on appeal to speak for the power of the reasoning in the cases that you have participated in?
Judge BORK. Yes. I have said what I have said about the judges' function and the importance of the reasoning, and I have a record,
a lot of cases with a lot of reasoning, and I would like to be judged on that record.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, yesterday I thought you clearly distinguished your view of the Supreme Court's rationale in some
14th amendment cases, and you demonstrated again that you fundamentally differ with result-oriented judges, and as I hear it, you are more concerned with legal rationale or thoughtful approach.
But then, I read in this morning's local newspaper, the Washing­ton Post, to find it suggested by your opponents that you are itching to overrule Boiling v. Sharpe and bring back segregated schools to the District of Columbia.
Judge BORK. Oh, that is absolutely preposterous. Nobody is going to pass, in the first place—this Congress is not going to pass a statute segregating the schools in the District of Columbia. If this Congress, in a fit of forgetfulness did, Boiling v. Sharpe is precedent there is absolutely no reason to overrule; none.
You know, all kinds of expectations and institutions have grown up around it. And this morning, I also mentioned that one might
have supported Boiling v. Sharpe on a first amendment rationale, and perhaps I did not explain that too clearly.
The first amendment protections include associational rights as well as other rights. And a law forbidding associations on grounds
of race might—I do not say would; I am not adopting a legal
theory; I am just saying we are into an area of arguability here—
might be attached on associational right grounds under the first amendment.
But to say that the reasoning of any case seems not adequate is not to say you want to overrule it, and it is certainly not to say you
want to bring back the underlying statute. Neither of those is true in my case.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, I hear you. I just wonder if you are as frustrated as I am, though, that people are not taking the trouble to listen to what you are saying.
Judge BORK. Well, you know, it is funny; I did see one brief com­ment in the paper this morning. It said that I denied that I was a racist, though nobody had accused me.
No, nobody had accused me, but Senator Humphrey asked me di­rectly whether I was, and I said no. All of a sudden, I am denying
things nobody has brought up. That is ridiculous. Senator GRASSLEY. If I could move on, Judge Bork, I would like
to talk about something we have heard a lot about. The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me. Judge, where did that appear?
Judge BORK. I do not know. Unfortunately, Senator, I get three papers in the morning. But I saw something in the middle of a story. I think that it said—
The CHAIRMAN. YOU have a right to be upset if that is true, be­cause I recall specifically your being asked that.
Judge BORK. Being asked; I was asked that, yes. As I recall, the
story said that I denied it, though I was not accused—which sounds
406
like, "The guilty flee where no man pursueth." But I was asked the
question.The CHAIRMAN. YOU were, in fact, asked the question. Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, we have heard a lot about the
issue of standing; that is, standing to sue in the federal courts.
Again, remembering the fact that I am not a lawyer, I would like
to bring up a technical area that I want to explore with you in the
doctrine of standing.I would like to just have you explain your views of this doctrine.
Judge BORK. My views of this doctrine are almost identical with
those of the Supreme Court. It is a separation of powers doctrine,
and it is a doctrine that is essential to keep the courts from dominating the society. As Lewis Powell has said, standing is about the
proper and properly limited role of courts in a democratic society.
And that is this reason. And this, oddly enough, I got from a
speech—it is in a footnote somewhere, if I cannot find it now—I got
from a speech given by Chief Justice John Marshall in Congress.
He said courts are there to decide controversies when an individual
or an organization has been hurt. And it has to be the individual
who has standing and not the issue involved which gives standing.
Otherwise, courts could just take on any issue they wanted to and
practically run the government. Standing is a way of making sure that people are really hurt,
suffered some injury, before they come in to litigate some large
constitutional question or statutory question that they would just
like to litigate out of interest. Now, there are two aspects of standing. One is the article III core
of standing. That is, the Court has said that part of standing being
a separation of powers question is demanded by the Constitution.
But there is an additional aspect of standing which is not demanded by the Constitution, but the courts have required as a prudential matter. Congress is free to give standing in the area where
courts would deny it on prudential grounds, but not free to give
standing where the court thinks that article III denies standing. Now, I should say that my opinions on standing, as I have an
analysis of them here by a professor you might all know—he points
out that my views on standing are almost identical to Lewis Pow-
ell's. And indeed, I was following some Lewis Powell opinions. And
when I wrote a standing opinion, Justice O'Connor quoted my opinion in her next opinion, so that Senator GRASSLEY. What about commenting, on Justice Powell's
opinion in Wirth v. Seldin. I think he wrote the majority opinion
there, and that is a famous case in this area that maybe would tell
some of the members of the committee that have judged you based
on whether or not you ought to take Justice Powell's seat. If you
would speak to that, maybe you would show that your reasoning is
not much different than his. Judge BORK. Well, it is entirely the same. In this Senator GRASSLEY. Entirely the same? Judge BORK. Well, as far as I can tell. I mean Senator GRASSLEY. Well, yes. I just want to emphasize it; I am
not disagreeing with you.
Judge BORK. Well, I cannot say that we would never disagree on
a standing case, but the analysis is entirely the same.
Let me say in this opinion I wrote, Barnes v. Kline, I said I rea­soned from Justice Powell's opinion in Wirth v. Seldin, and I quoted him. He said,
In essence, the question of standing is whether the litigant is entitled to have the court decide the merits of the dispute or of particular issues. This inquiry involves both constitutional limitations on federal court jurisdiction and prudential limita­tions on its exercise. In both dimensions, standing is founded in concern about the proper and properly limited role of the courts in a democratic society.
Then I wrote, right below that,
This should make it clear that the jurisdictional requirement of standing keeps courts out of areas that are not properly theirs. It is thus an aspect of democratic theory.
And that is what it does. It is one way of confining courts to the proper area of their authority.
Senator GRASSLEY. I have just one follow-up question on stand­ing, and as you related it to Justice Powell, and then Senator Hatch wanted just a little bit of my time.
We would not, then, based upon what you have just said and what you believe, anticipate any major shifts in the Court's views on this issue if you were to replace Justice Powell?
Judge BORK. No. I agree with the Court's line of rulings in recent years.
Senator GRASSLEY. Okay. Senator Hatch?
Senator HATCH. Well, thank you, Senator, for yielding to me.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to put into the record at this time— and would ask that a committee clerk be asked to hand these out to the members of the media—100 selected law professors favoring the confirmation of Robert H. Bork as Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. And let me just draw attention to a few of them: Dean Robert Mundheim, of the University of Pennsylvania Law School, General Counsel at the Treasury Department under Presi­dent Carter; Mary Ann Glendon, Harvard Law Professor, Chief Editor of the International Law Encyclopedia; Bruce Hafen, the Dean of the Brigham Young University School of Law; Albert Blaustein, of Rutgers, President of the Human Rights Advocates International; Henry Manne, Dean, George Mason Law School; Paul Marcus, Dean of the University of Arizona Law School; Steven Frankino, Dean of the Villanova Law School—just to men­tion a few.
I think that these are eminent professors, eminent names, who support your nomination and want to see you on the Supreme Court, even though some of them may differ with you on individual issues, as would be expected.
So if I could have this distributed, I would appreciate it.
The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
The CHAIRMAN. The Senator has about 8 or 10 minutes left.
Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you. You are right, Senator.
Judge Bork, this morning Senator DeConcini was questioning you about the Finzer v. Barry case, and I would like to follow up on that. My reason for following up on that is because I sponsored leg­islation on that subject last year, along with Senator DeConcini, to repeal the 1938 District of Columbia ordinance barring political protests within 500 feet of a foreign embassy. I opposed this law be­cause I think it is overly broad, and it infringes upon some of our basic civil rights, the first amendment freedoms of speech and as­sembly. And even worse, Judge, I think it has been a law that has been selectively enforced.
Judge BORK. May I say, Senator—because that is a good point— there was no allegation of selective enforcement in Finzer v. Barry.
Senator GRASSLEY. There was not?
Judge BORK. NO. Nobody attacked the law on grounds of selective enforcement. That would have produced a different case.
Senator GRASSLEY. Okay. Well, at this point, because of congres­sional action last year, we have been promised by the District of Columbia Government that it will consider changing the 500-foot rule. I hope they will come around to favoring the free speech point of view.
Now, last year, you authored this opinion which upheld the con­stitutionality of the ordinance as challenged by a group of protes­tors who were arrested in front of the Soviet and Nicaraguan Em­bassies.
I am not going to ask you to go into the rationale of upholding it, because I think that would be repetitive. But I think I need to say to you that I disagree with you in this case. I think the statute is over-broad. For example—and this is what I really resent as far as the District law is concerned—in 1972, Congress passed a statute that prohibits demonstrations within 100 feet of an embassy. This statute also covers consulates in cities in the United States, and even the United Nations' complex. The 100-foot rule, then, works without any danger—or, let me put it this way—I feel it protects foreign officials adequately.
I am prepared to wait for a decision of the D.C. City Council as they revisit this issue. However, but I would like to assume, if I could, that you would have no problem upholding a local statute that was more in line with the Federal law in this area.
Judge BORK. Oh, no. Nothing in this opinion suggests that the protection has to be as much as it is or as little as it is. This opin­ion merely says that for the reasons given, I think this law is con­stitutional. But that does not mean you have to have that law. It is for Congress, or in the first instance, the City Council, to decide what law satisfies the requirements of the law of nations. And I do not know that a court has any power to say you have to have a more severe law—not at all. That is a power given to Congress by article I.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, this morning you cited the Su­preme Court's Chadha case, which struck down a version of the legislative veto. My interest in the legislative veto has been long­term in the 12 years I have been in Congress—making greater use of it, preserving it. I do not like the Chadha case. I have to live
with it. Senator Levin and others and I have ways we feel that we can make the legislative veto constitutional.
We feel that the legislative veto is vital to Congress' ability to put the brakes on a runaway and faceless bureaucracy. And sometimes, as you deal with in the courts, you know that bureaucracy can run over the rights of people.
I am not looking for an advisory opinion now, Judge. But what if Congress would enact a legislative veto that provides (1) bicameral passage and (2) presentment to the President? Isn't that about all that Chadha would require for a legislative veto to be constitutional? Judge BORK. Offhand, I really should not talk about that, Sena­tor, because I might get a case like that on either court I am on.
But certainly, those are two elements that Chadha discusses—lack
of presentment and the lack of bicameral legislation. I forget
whether there are additional ones, and I do not want to pass on the constitutionality of what you propose here.
Senator GRASSLEY. Okay. Well, let us just say from your perspec­tive, serving on the D.C. Circuit, you have occasion to review many
decisions by regulatory agencies. So I am wondering if that perspective—seeing what agencies do, how they do it, how some of
what they do is contrary to the intent of Congress—because I think
the courts give great deference to that—does that give you any
philosophical position on the concept of legislative veto, if you
could speak generally to that point? Judge BORK. Well, I think all I can say is that the subjects of the delegation of discretion or power to agencies and the subject of the
legislative veto are closely connected philosophically or politically
or however you want to put it, so that I understand the motivation
for the legislative veto, but I would also think that narrower or
more structured delegations to bureaucracies, to agencies, might also address the problem you are concerned about.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, what about considering the 20th century problem of legislating in a lot of very technical areas in which,
maybe the Congress does not have enough expertise. It just seems
to me that the courts ought to take into consideration that the
times demand some delegation—by the Congress to agencies—of
the details of statues, while still allowing for the retention, by Congress, of some control over this process? Judge BORK. Yes. Of course, the more Congress lays down in the delegation the criteria to be followed by the agency, the easier it is
for a court to review the agency and keep the agency within
bounds. But if the delegation is unstructured and sort of open, a
court has a very difficult time reviewing it, and only Congress can provide a cure.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, my time is up. I guess I would just say in closing on that point, that I think you have asked us to consider
that times have changed during the period that you have been
writing and expressing your views—regarding your overall philosophy of giving deference to the legislative process—because the
place where democracy is best exercised is in the parliamentary
bodies. I would, in turn, ask you to consider our changing circumstances and the limits of what the modern Congress can do through statute; that Congress cannot write laws as technically correct as
you have described during this discussion today. Judge BORK. I agree there is a problem, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, we will now take a 5-minute recess.
The CHAIRMAN. There will be order in the chamber, please.
Judge, in terms of the rest of the day, Senator Leahy is next.
Senator Specter is back, and I am trying to accommodate one of
our colleagues who cannot be here. I hope we only have to go two
more; at the most, we will go three more. Judge BORK. All right. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Leahy. Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, I had
said yesterday I wanted to follow up with some of the questions I
had asked you on free speech. Before I do, I want to make sure I
understand a couple of points that have been covered here. You have talked about the Finzer case with Senator Grassley
and Senator DeConcini, and a number of your supporters have
stated that in 400 cases you have not been reversed, and have left
the implication you have had 400 cases go up on appeal. You have
not done that, sir, but a number of your supporters have. Just so
we can note for the record, the Finzer case is the only majority
opinion that you have written that has gone up on appeal to the
Supreme Court, is that correct? Judge BORK. I don't know, Senator, I hadn't kept count that way.
It could well be correct. Senator LEAHY. I believe it is. At this point cert, has been granted, but the case has not been decided by the Supreme Court. Judge BORK. That's correct, Senator. It has not been argued yet. Senator LEAHY. And if you were to serve on the Supreme Court,
you would not be able to sit on that case anyway. Judge BORK. Oh, no, of course not. Any matter I touched in any
way on the Court of Appeals I would recuse myself on the Supreme
Court. Senator LEAHY. And I mention that just to clarify that you can
take a little bit more liberty in talking about it. As I understand
the Finzer case, that involved a statute, as you said, passed by Congress, which says basically that if you are going to have somebody
demonstrating within 500 feet of an embassy, they can do that only
if their demonstration is favorable to the policies of that government. Is that, in laymen's language, basically what it says? Judge BORK. Well, in laymen's language, that's right; it says you
may not—let me see if I can find it. The congregation aspect—you
may not congregate within 500 feet for any purpose; and the first
part of the statute, it's unlawful to display any placard designed to
bring into public odium any foreign government or to bring into
public disrepute political, social, economic acts of any foreign government, that's right.Senator LEAHY. YOU could, however, display a placard which was
supportive of that government.
Judge BORK. That's correct. Senator LEAHY. It's interesting, because really what you do with
such a statute is an unusual twist. Let's just use—and I am not
asking you for some kind of a declaratory judgment on this—but
417
let's take a hypothetical: we have the embassy of Iraq, and after
the Iraq air force had nearly destroyed the U.S.S. STARK, killing
more than 30 Americans, according to that statute you could have
somebody down there with a placard saying to the Iraqi Government we agree with everything you did, right on. But if the mother
or father of one of those sailors killed wanted to stand down there
with a placard and say we think this was a heinous, murderous act, they couldn't do it.
Judge BORK. Under the statute, that is correct.
Senator LEAHY. In some ways—and I realize this matter is up before the Supreme Court, and they will have to decide it—in some
ways I would find that virtually unconstitutional on its face in al
lowing one type of speech but not the other. It would be one thing
to say for security you don't allow people to congregate within a certain distance of an embassy—and I can understand that.
Judge BORK. That's right. I dealt with that point in the opinion— I guess I better not argue it further. But, of course, Congress is
free, I suppose—I'm not passing on the constitutionality again of a
hypothetical statute—but Congress would certainly be free now or
any other time to say no expression of opinion about a foreign gov­ernment may be had within 200 feet, 300 feet, whatever.
Senator LEAHY. Wouldn't that be more acceptable than to say you can have one kind but not the other, and tell Americans that
they can say one sort of thing about a foreign government but not something else on our soil?
Judge BORK. Americans can say anything they want to about Iraq, anything hostile they want to say about Iraq or any other foreign government, or this government, the U.S. Government—just
not within 500 feet of the embassy of that government. But the rest of the country .
Senator LEAHY. The point I make concerns me very much. In a court upholding a statute which says to Americans you can certain
things but not other things. It's one thing to say you can't say anything within a certain distance; but to say you can say some things but not other things—that I find of great concern.
Judge BORK. It is a matter of concern, I agree with you about that—and I tried to deal with that concern. In a way, saying you
may not say anything is a more restrictive statute than saying you may not insult a foreign government.
Senator LEAHY. I find more chilling to say that we will select what can be said. But leave that be, we'll go up on appeal, and we'll see how the eight members decide it.
Let me talk about another area, though. We are both lawyers, and I consider that an honorable profession. I know you do. The
proud tradition of pro bono work—certainly that was the thing
stressed to me in the first law firm I went to after I left Georgetown and went back home. That tradition wasn't always observed,
but it should be, because it's more than a tradition—it s an obligation. The Judiciary Committee asks every single nominee for any
federal court position, from the U.S. Claims Court to the Supreme Court, how they have fulfilled that obligation.
Let me read the question we asked you, and your answer. The question says: "An ethical consideration under Canon 2 of the American Bar Association's Code of Professional Responsibility calls for every lawyer, regardless of professional prominence or pro­fessional workload, to find some time to participate in serving the disadvantaged. Describe what you, Judge Bork, have done to fulfill these responsibilities, listing specific instances, the amount of time devoted to each."
And you responded: "During my time in practice, 1954­1962 . . ."—in other words, 8 years—"the firms I worked for did not engage in pro bono activities. While I was a professor at Yale I was not a member of the Connecticut Bar and cases of this sort were handled by teachers and students in the clinical legal educa­tion program."
What we asked you was what you have done to make legal serv­ices available to the disadvantaged. I read that answer as saying that you found ways why you didn't fulfill the obligation. Now, in 1955-1962, you were an associate, then a partner at Kirkland and Ellis—that's one of the finest law firms in this country. You say the firm did not engage in pro bono activities.
I find that hard to believe. I can't believe in that whole firm people didn't engage in pro bono activities.
Judge BORK. There may have been—I didn't know of any.
Senator LEAHY. But you didn't.
Judge BORK. I didn't, and the firm had no program for pro bono activities, and, to tell you the truth, the younger people in the firm were worked very hard, and I remember I gave a speech and a senior partner complained about the billing hours I didn't get be­cause I was giving a speech. I don't think the attitude towards these things was then what it is now. I think a lot of firms have pro bono programs now who didn't then.
Senator LEAHY. I became a lawyer in 1964, and I know the firm I went to, a small firm, had followed the tradition of most of the firms in my own State for years and years before that of pro bono work. Every law firm that sought to hire me in Washington at that same time told me of their tradition for years before of pro bono work. There was nothing to stop you from doing pro bono work, was there?
Judge BORK. NO, I suppose I could have asked for time to do it. Senator LEAHY. Are you proud of the fact that you didn't do any pro bono work?
Judge BORK. NO, I didn't, I'm not proud of it. The things I spe­cialized in would not have been very useful in pro bono work—I would have had to learn a new area of law. But that's not an excuse for not doing it.
Senator LEAHY. Let me ask you about that. You are an expert in constitutional law.
Judge BORK. When I was in the firm, I didn't do any constitu­tional law; I was doing major litigation, which means two-thirds of it was antitrust law, and other forms of litigation that were pro­tracted and expensive. I had no contact with constitutional law until I began to teach it.
Senator LEAHY. Judge Bork, you are acknowledged by every one of us here as a brilliant lawyer. You don't think that those talents could have been brought to bear somewhere in pro bono work?
419
Judge BORK. Oh, yes, they could have been. I didn't mean to say
that. I just said that the fields I was working in did not lend themselves to it, and I didn't think about it—and I should have. Senator LEAHY. The reason I ask these questions—I look back
over what you have done and I have to think about what Senator
Simpson said at the beginning of this about how the average
lawyer deals with real people, he sees somebody where they are
going through a divorce or a criminal matter, the anguish and all
of an individual. These people also get to the Supreme Court. Why
should we not be concerned that your whole legal career has been
isolated from that kind of reality? Judge BORK. Oh, I have dealt with that kind of reality in various
cases; I just didn't do pro bono work. I see this kind of a case on
the bench; I saw that kind of a case when I was Solicitor General. I
didn't do pro bono work when I was at the firm. Senator LEAHY. Your most significant clients are, what, General
Motors, General Atomic, Shell Oil? These are huge corporations. Judge BORK. Oh, I had clients like the local distributor—a local
distributor of electronic products in New Haven who was having
trouble with a major corporation. I gave them an antitrust complaint on his behalf, and they came back and settled. Senator LEAHY. Let me ask you about the time you were at Yale. Judge BORK. That was while I was at Yale. Senator LEAHY. Let me go on that. How much pro bono work did
you do when you were at Yale? Judge BORK. I didn't do any pro bono work at Yale, Senator. Senator LEAHY. Again, why not? Judge BORK. I just didn't think about. We had this whole clinical
legal studies program which did all of that, and very few professors
had anything to do with that program except to establish it and to
have a member of the faculty run it. Senator LEAHY. Prior to going to Yale, you had not had involvement with constitutional law, but at Yale you did. Judge BORK. That's right.Senator LEAHY. YOU were an expert, you taught constitutional
law. Judge BORK. Correct. Senator LEAHY. Over and over again, in the kind of pro bono
matters, especially involving indigent defendants, others, we see
constitutional issues. Were you ever asked when you were at Yale
to help out in any of these? Judge BORK. NO, I was never approach for pro bono work. Senator LEAHY. YOU never volunteered your own expertise as a
constitutional authority for pro bono work? Judge BORK. NO. The CHAIRMAN. Senator, I think he's answered that question.
Senator LEAHY. Let me ask you this question. Was it because you
did not have time, the inclination, or were not asked?
Judge BORK. TO tell you the truth, Senator, I was not asked, and
I was busy working on other things and I didn't think about it. I
should have thought about it. I didn't. I assume that our clinical
legal program, if they thought I had something of use to them,
would have asked me.
Senator LEAHY. It's not a matter of time.
Judge BORK. No, you can always stop doing one thing and do another thing.Senator LEAHY. Let me go back to your testimony yesterday. I
said I'd follow up on this. You discussed your past writings and
your current views on issues of free speech, and you were sharply
critical—as a number of us have pointed out, and you have—of a
wide range of doctrines which the Supreme Court has employed to
protect the rights of Americans to say what they want to say. Now,
yesterday, though, in answer to my questions, you described your
current views as much closer to the idea of free speech that the Supreme Court has applied over the past 30 or 40 years. Judge BORK. Well, let me—I'm sorry, you weren't finished with
the question?Senator LEAHY. That's all right. Judge BORK. What I said yesterday, I hope, and what I said this
morning was that in a variety of areas, had the legal theories I espoused, had the law developed along those lines—I'm not talking
about the political speech doctrine or idea now—I could have accepted it. For example, I talked about Brandenburg v. Ohio, and
what I said—and we are talking there about the advocacy of law
violation. Now, I want to take out of this discussion the Martin
Luther King kind of problem where often Mr. King was advocating
violating a law in order to test its constitutionality—I have no
problem with that. I am talking about the advocacy of law violation which is not aimed at framing a constitutional test. The difference between what I said and what Brandenburg said is this: Brandenburg requires a closer nexus, a closer connection, between the
advocacy and the lawless action than I did. For example, I thought,
for a variety of reasons, that one might constitutionally punish advocacy of law violation, even if the violation wasn't imminent.
Brandenburg added to that only the qualification that the law violation must be imminent when the speaker speaks. Now, I could have accepted the law if it had developed in the
way I suggested, but I can also Brandenburg in the way the law did
develop.Senator LEAHY. And yesterday, in answer to my question, you
did accept Brandenburg, but prior to that, in all your published
statements anyway, you had not. Judge BORK. That's right. And this isn't a great change of mine.
As I say, I could have accepted the law as I suggested, but I accept
the fact that the Supreme Court has added an additional safeguard
for free speech advocating lawlessness, and, as an academic, I
didn't think that theoretically justified; as a judge, I accept it. And
that's all there really is to that. Senator LEAHY. Brandenburg, of course, was decided in 1969.
Your Indiana Law Review article, which pretty well rejects it, was
in 1971. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator LEAHY. And I want to go back again to some of your
statements, because I want to find out just where the changes take
place and what it is that jogged those kinds of changes. I had asked
you how far you had gone from the bright-line distinction between
political and non-political speech by 1973, when you testified on the
subject before the committee in your confirmation hearings for So­licitor General, and that is when you said you were about where the Supreme Court currently is. But let me go over some of your writings and statements after 1973.
In 1979, in your speech on the first amendment at the University of Michigan, you said that
The transmission of news and information relevant to the political process should be protected by the first amendment.
And all of us can be happy about that, and the news media here I am sure are. But you went on to say There is no occasion on this rationale to throw a constitutional protection around forms of expression that do not directly feed the democratic process. It is sometimes said that works of art are capable of influencing political attitudes. But in these in­direct and relatively remote relationships of the political process, verbal or visual expression does not differ at all from other human activities such as sports or busi­ness, which are also capable of influencing political attitudes, but which are not on that account immune from regulation.
Now, do you still believe that only those forms of expression that directly feed the democratic process should receive first amend­ment protection?
Judge BORK. May I have the page, please, Senator? I just got the speech in front of me.
Senator LEAHY. It's on pages 8 to 9.
Judge BORK. Well, the transmission of news and information rel­evant to the political process includes a great deal of speech that is not political obviously—and I have discussed this. It includes moral discourse, social discourse, scientific discourse, and, as I said in one of these speeches, fiction. And I said there is no occasion on this rationale to throw constitutional protection around forms of ex­pression that do not directly feed the democratic process.
That's right; on that rationale they don't. And I think I could still—if I were starting back, before any decisions of the Supreme Court, and trying to work out a theory of the first amendment, I suppose I would have worked out a theory about those kinds of things that affect political ideas. Now, as a friend of mine remind­ed me a couple of weeks ago, if you read "The Tropic of Capricorn" by Henry Miller, you find a lot of stuff in there that is really politi­cal—criticism of the establishment and so forth. So that those things would be protected.
Now, I don't know where I would come out if I sat down now in the absence of Supreme Court precedent and worked out a theory of the first amendment—I don't know where the line would be drawn.
But what I did say is that the Supreme Court has decided a lot of things which I can accept and do accept as law, and have no desire to change.
Senator LEAHY. Are you saying that today it does not have to di­rectly feed the democratic process to be immune from regulation?
Judge BORK. That is what the law is, and I accept that law.
Under current Supreme Court law, if the Government tries to suppress a book, and that action is challenged, does the Court have to examine the book to determine its relationship to the political process in order to decide whether the book receives first amend­ment protection?
I don't think so, Senator. I think under current law the Court
has to examine the book to see whether it is obscene in the way
that the Supreme Court has defined it. Senator LEAHY. Let's assume that the allegation of obscenity is
not made. Then is the relationship to the political process irrelevant to the question of whether government could ban the publication? Judge BORK. Under current law it is and it is law I accept. Senator LEAHY. What about a motion picture? If the government
tries to ban it and it is not obscene, does it make any difference
whether its content relates to the political process? Judge BORK. NO. Under current law, it does not. I think any form
of expression now—if it's not obscene—I think the Supreme Court
protects.Senator LEAHY. What about a painting or a photograph? Judge BORK. I think so. Senator LEAHY. What about an article in a scientific journal? Judge BORK. Oh, clearly. Senator LEAHY. In other words, if a government tried to prevent
its publication but it is not obscene, it doesn't make any difference
whether the content relates to the political process. Judge BORK. That is the law and it is law I accept. Senator LEAHY. DO you think it should make any difference? Judge BORK. NO, I don't think it does because if you start from
the political process core of the first amendment, and I should say,
although I have now lost it, everybody accepts the fact that the
first amendment starts from a political process core, and I've mentioned Harry Kalven and Meiklejohn. In Garrison v. Louisiana, Justice Brennan talks about this core.
For speech concerning public affairs is more than self-expression. It
is the essence of self-government, and that is where everybody
starts from, but that has moved out now to all forms of self-expression that are not obscene. Now, I suppose if I went back and rethought the doctrine, which
I really haven't rethought since 1971 except to give up on the 1971
bright line, if I went back and rethought it, I would suppose that
among other things, it would place too great a burden upon courts
to sit down and ask whether this thing feeds the democratic process. Senator LEAHY. Should that kind of a question of burden—if
we're really dealing with a constitutional issue—should that be
that overriding?Judge BORK. It certainly is important, Senator. You will find
that, for example, in the political question doctrine, courts will not
sometimes get into what looks like a constitutional issue if they
think there are not standards for them to apply that are suitable
for judicial application. And I think that is right. Particularly, in
this case, applying the political process core and moving out, it
would seem to me better, just in terms of freedom and in terms of
making the tasks of the courts doable, to place obscenity off limits
and protest the rest.
That does not mean that philosophically a different line might
not be drawn if you ignore other considerations. But I have no
desire to impose a philosophical view which I do not now have.
Senator LEAHY. If the Government were to try to punish somebody speaking, if the speech is not obscene, does the first amendment protection depend upon whether the speech is related to political matters? Judge BORK. No. I think that is thoroughly settled. We are talk­ing about a thoroughly settled body of case law. Senator LEAHY. Let me show you a couple of books. I am not really trying to plug anybody here, but the one on the right is
Speaker O'Neill's latest book. It is number "n" or something on the
best seller list. A capsule description, the Post says: "The former Speaker of the
House recounts half a century in public life as a bread-and-butter
liberal." The other is on the nonfiction paperback best seller list,
"Fatherhood" by Bill Cosby. It is described in the reviews as an
actor on the subject of children. Now, let's assume neither book is obscene. Judge BORK. I am willing to assume that, Senator. Senator LEAHY. I have not read either one of them, but I will
assume that, too. Does it make any difference in first amendment
protection—I mean the fact that this one is obviously political—the
excerpts I have read are very political—and this one of Mr.
Cosby's, I assume, is not—that does not make any difference, does
it? Judge BORK. Under settled law it does not and I accept it. It seems to me that the settled law is now that the person writing the
book does not have to prove that it is political or any way connected to politics. The settled law is the Government has to prove it is
obscene. Senator LEAHY. SO if we were dealing with—at least by the title
of it—something, a movie, on the one hand, "The Making of the
Constitution," and the other one, "Revenge of the Nerds," at least
by the title it does not make any difference? Judge BORK. NO. That does make any difference, and I have seen so many movies about the Constitution that I would now choose
the second movie.  Senator LEAHY. NOW, the reason I am asking so many of these questions, Judge Bork, is that I am concerned. I do not want this—
an expression I have used—being a confirmation conversion. That
is going to be a question in the minds of a number and that is why
I am going into such detail. You have a 1987 statement calling for a case-by-case review of
these matters to consider where they go in the political process. Judge BORK. May I know what that is, Senator? Senator LEAHY. May 28th, 1987—1 did not realize I had it here in
my book—it was a Bill Moyers interview. In fact, I asked them for
the transcript. Let me read down the part—I would be happy to
give it to you—but the part that I am relying on, Mr. Moyers said,
speaking to you, "Do you think they were dealing primarily, at
least in their"—speaking of free speech—"at least in their frame of
things, with the speech of the republic, the speech of the political
universe that we operate in as citizens,"—speaking of those writing
the Constitution.
You answered,
Sure, but in addition to that I am sure they recognized that other kinds of speech—speech about moral issues, speech about moral values, religion and so forth—all of those things feed into the way we govern ourselves, so it does not have to be explicitly political speech to be protected.
MOYERS. So novels.
"BORK. Scientific speech.
MOYERS. Art.
BORK. "I think you are getting towards the outer edge there and where you draw the line would be a case-by-case basis."
So you have gone actually beyond that today.
Judge BORK. NO. When you get to art you may be into the area of pornography and obscenity. Senator LEAHY. IS that what you meant? Judge BORK. I think so, yes. Senator LEAHY. That is the only thing? Judge BORK. Senator, let me speak to this issue of confirmation
conversions. I have got a lot of positions that I have taken in the past that I have reaffirmed here which I have not converted. On this issue I do not know where I would draw the line as an original matter under the first amendment. I have not rethought that whole thing and there would be a lot of arguments both ways.
It is not an original matter. We now have an enormous body of case law which is well settled and should not be overturned or should not be cut back. It is there. I mean, if there is any body of case law that is massive and solid, it is that body of case law.
Senator LEAHY. I agree with you. But the reason I asked you the question and your first very strong statement that we referred to— the Indiana Law Review article—was 2 years after the Branden­burg case. And that is why many of us felt it was well settled then.
Judge BORK. Well, let me address that then, Senator. Back then I was speaking as a theorist about what the courts had a right to force upon legislatures by way of free speech. And it seemed to me that the judgment of whether or not to allow speech that called for the overthrow of the government, or violence, was really a matter of prudence. That kind of speech does not feed the way we govern ourselves very well.
Therefore, I questioned whether or not—it seemed to me that that prudential decision might well be left to the legislature. The law did not develop that way. It developed otherwise and an addi­tional safeguard was added by the Supreme Court—that is, the ne­cessity of showing the imminence of lawless action.
I am not sure that if I sat down and argued it theoretically I would not criticize Brandenburg again. But it is a settled position and I accept it.
Senator LEAHY. But on June 10th of this year, just a month before the President nominated you, you said even then that a judge has to decide whether a work of art or literature falls on one side or another of a wavering line between speech that has some relationship to the political process and speech that does not and only then can a judge decide whether work is protected by the first amendment.
Judge BORK. Where was this? Oh, this is Moyers? Senator LEAHY. Well, this, I believe, is your Worldnet interview that has been referred to earlier here today.
425
Judge BORK. May I see it, please? Do we have it? Wait, somebody gave it to me in the morning and I have now lost it.
Senator LEAHY. Page 26.
Judge BORK. I have now lost it. It is in another room. Well, that is certainly not the law. That was a back and forth over a satellite hookup and that is—wait a minute, Senator. I think what I said was a little better.
I said, "I am afraid the judge has to draw a line. It may be a wavering line." And that is true. As you go case-by-case you are going to get a wavering line. There is no escaping that in matters of human judgment.
It may be that wherever he draws it you can point out that it could have moved somewhere else along the spectrum.
That is always true.
Clearly, as you get into art and literature, particularly into forms of art, and if you want to call it literature and art, which are pornography and things approach­ing it, you are dealing with something now that is not in anyway and form the way we govern ourselves and in fact may be quite deleterious. I would doubt that courts ought to throw protection around that.
Senator LEAHY. Judge, that was not the question. The question was—it was not on pornography. It was on, can one really separate those forms of self-expression that feed into what you call the dis­course in a free society, from political speech or from the formation of a climate of opinions? Can you really draw borders there? And that is when you said you would draw a line, albeit possibly a wa­vering line.
Judge BORK. Well, but I then gave an illustration, and my illus­tration was art and literature which is pornography or approaches pornography. That is the only illustration I gave of where you get into the line.
Senator LEAHY. Well, your view of June 10th is your view of Sep­tember 17th?
Judge BORK. Yes.
Senator LEAHY. Okay.
Judge BORK. If I sat down to write it, I would express it rather more clearly, but what it says is, when you get to literature and art which is really pornography, then you are dealing with something now where you draw a line.
Senator LEAHY. Let me ask you about another free speech con­cept. Just one question. That is the idea that a local community would have the right to suppress speech that does not meet the legal test of obscenity on the grounds that the speech is harmful to the community moral standards.
Judge BORK. Where is this, Senator? Senator LEAHY. Well, in your 1979 University of Michigan speech on page 15. Judge BORK. Yes. Well, on page 15 I am talking about a taste for pornography and I was making a distinction. I said, The court and some judges do tend to assume that it is not a problem if willing adults indulge a taste for pornography in a theatre whose outside advertising does not offend the squeamish.
I said:
The assumption is wrong. The consequences of such private indulgence may have public consequences far more unpleasant than industrial pollution. The attitudes, taste and moral values inculcated do not stay behind in the theatre. A change in moral environment and social attitudes towards sex, marriage, duties toward chil­dren and the like may as surely be felt as harm as the possibility of physical vio­lence.
And I was complaining that the Court has not explained what the public feels to be harm in that way may not be counted as one. But again, I am talking about pornography.
Senator LEAHY. Pornography or obscenity as we use it in the
legal term?Judge BORK. Yes. Senator LEAHY. Both are the same, or are you using the terms
interchangeably?Judge BORK. Well, I have been using them interchangeably. Probably I should not. But obscenity. All right. Senator LEAHY. I understand my time is up. I also understand we have a vote on. The CHAIRMAN. We have 7 minutes left in the vote. When we come back we will start with
Senator HUMPHREY. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if by prior agree­ment already reached between Senator Specter and me and you I might have 2 minutes at this point. Are you planning to recess at this juncture?
The CHAIRMAN. I was, but if it is 2 minutes, fire away. Senator HUMPHREY. It is timely. I thank the Senator from Penn­sylvania for yielding to me for this purpose.
I want to correct the mistaken impression which was left by the line of questioning pursued by the Senator from Vermont on the subject of pro bono service. Let me ask the Judge these quick ques­tions.
How many years did you serve in the Marine Corps, Judge? Judge BORK. I guess a total of three and a half or four, some­thing like that. Senator HUMPHREY. All right. Let's round it off to four. How
many years did you teach at Yale in total? Judge BORK. Fifteen years. Senator HUMPHREY. And how many years did you serve as a Solicitor General? Judge BORK. A little over three and a half, almost four. Senator HUMPHREY. YOU have been 5 years, five and a half on
the Circuit Court? Judge BORK. Five and a half on the Circuit Court. Senator HUMPHREY. That is 28 years during which time this man
has chosen not to devote himself to lucrative private law practice at which he could have by now become a multi, multimillionaire. None of us in this panel doubt it.
We are not talking about a man who is coming to us from 30 years of private practice where he has made a lot of money. We are talking about a man who has sacrificed for himself and his family so that he could serve in the role of teacher and serve in the role of public service. For someone to say that someone who has devoted himself for 28 years selflessly to teaching and to public service at
427
the sacrifice of his family, for anyone to suggest that he has not
given a good part of his life in pro bono service is ridiculous. Now, I know the Senator from Vermont did not mean that in a
mean spirit. I think he said it in a mistaken spirit, but I wanted to
correct the record because I think that is an outrageous impression
to try to create. Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman? The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Senator LEAHY. Judge Bork, I just want to ask you, according to
the report you gave to us, you spoke of your—and I realize that you
have sacrificed to be a Solicitor General just as Members sacrifice
to be here—but if I am correct in reading your report to this committee, and something that perhaps the Senator from New Hampshire has not had a chance to read, that in 1979, assuming your
consultant work at $175 an hour, you made approximately $197,000
that year for consulting work; in 1980, assuming $225 an hour,
around $250,000 to $300,000 a year for consulting work; in 1981, assuming $225 an hour and leaving Yale about mid-year, around
$150,000. Are those figures at least in the ball park? Judge BORK. They are in the ball park. Those are the only years
I ever made any money in consulting. Senator LEAHY. Yes, but I just do not Judge BORK. And there was a reason why I did it and I do not
want to go into it here. Senator LEAHY. I understand. And I understand those reasons and I agree with them and I have absolutely nothing against that.
You were absolutely justified in earning that, but each one of us
made certain decisions to go into private light and I did not want
the Senator from New Hampshire to leave a mistaken impression.
You were absolutely justified in making those fees. They were totally proper and nobody is suggesting otherwise. Judge BORK. All right. Those were the only years in which I did. Senator LEAHY. Thank you. Senator HUMPHREY. Judge Bork, this is a very personal question.
If you would prefer not to answer it, by all means do not. But were
those years in which you engaged in outside employment years
which coincided with heavy medical bills in your family? Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. I think it is appropriate we stop and take a vote. The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will resume. Judge, with the grace of God, the good will of the neighbors, and
the cooperation of the Senate, we will have you out of here in an
hour. Judge BORK. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Okay? Sorry we are going so late. Senator Specter? Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I regret that I missed a good part
of the proceeding today because I had a prior commitment to join
the President and go into Philadelphia for the celebration. But I
have been briefed and I hope that I will not ask you on areas
which have already been covered otherwise.
But I would like to return now to the question of first amendment freedom of speech. You had made a comment in the latter
part of the questioning of Senator Leahy about what you termed
confirmation conversion, suggesting that there may have been
some changes in your approach today caused by the confirmation process.
You had made a comment that Brandenburg was "not a great change of mind" for you on this issue. And I raise a question with
you, Judge Bork, about the candor of that representation. This is a
very complex subject. You have to wade through an enormous number of cases to really come to grips with it.
You had commented, back in the Indiana Law Review article, at page 20, that "I am, of course, aware that this"—referring to the
clear and present danger test—departs drastically from existing court-made law."
You also said, in the University of Michigan speech, that "Hess and Brandenburg are fundamentally wrong interpretations of the
first amendment. And in the Indiana Law Review article, you go
on for 15 pages spelling out the differences, so that it seems to me
that it is really plain on the face of this record your understanding
and acknowledgement that there is really an enormous difference
between the principles you article and that Justice Sanford had articulated years ago, and what the clear and present danger test stands for and what Brandenburg stands for, isn't there?
Judge BORK. That is correct, Senator, but let me speak to this issue of confirmation conversion, which I think is quite wrong and
I have adhered to a number of positions that I have taken previous­ly that are controversial, or at least seem to be.
On Brandenburg, I did not say my mind had changed. I think it would have been legitimate for the Court to follow the line I took,
which was that advocacy of violent overthrow of the Government
or advocacy of lawless behavior, violation of law, when you are not
trying to test the constitutionality of the law, the Court could have said that the legislature may prohibit that speech.
But what I said was, as a theorist, I doubted Brandenburg. I think Brandenburg may have gone too—went too far, but I accept
Brandenburg as a judge and I have no desire to overturn it. I am
not changing my criticism of the case. I just accept it as settled
law. Senator SPECTER. Well, when you say that Brandenburg and your acceptance of it is not a great change of mind, it seems to me that
that is not really quite on target considering your very forceful disagreement with the Holmes clear and present danger test and with Brandenburg.
Judge BORK. Well, I am not saying that I think—if Brandenburgand the clear and present danger test came up for the first time, I think I might not agree with them, as a theorist and maybe even as a judge. But they are not coming up for the first time, they are settled law. That is, Brandenburg, I suppose, lies somewhere on the spectrum between my position when I agreed with Sanford and the clear and present danger test.
And, as a theorist or as a judge facing it for the first time, I
might not vote for Brandenburg.
Senator SPECTER. Well, Brandenburg is pretty much the clear
and present danger test. It really follows from the clear and
present danger test as you wrote and spoke at the University of
Michigan.Judge BORK. Well, I was corrected on that once. I was arguing a
case in the Supreme Court and I referred to the clear and present
danger test, and Justice Douglas said, "We got rid of that with
Brandenburg" So they at least intended Brandenburg to be something different altogether. Senator SPECTER. Well, that is when you were arguing Parker v.
Levy.
Judge BORK. That is correct. Now, what I am simply saying is I
am not sitting here today telling you that if I write an article again
as a law professor that I would say Brandenburg is wonderful. All I
am telling you is that as a judge I accept Brandenburg as the law. Senator SPECTER. But the difficulty, Judge Bork, is that the cases
arise and there are many nuances, and when you interpret the
clear and present danger test, Brandenburg, Indiana v. Hess, a
mind-set is of importance. When you commented about this yesterday, we talked about
ideas which were old ideas, but you had pretty much adhered to
your position that you had written back in 1971 and that you had
spoken about at Michigan in 1978 when you addressed the Judge
Advocate General's School back in 1984, hadn't you? Judge BORK. I forget what I said at the Judge Advocate General's
School. That was a talk made from notes. Originally, I don't think
it was written out much. Senator SPECTER. NO, there is a text. Judge BORK. IS there? Might be a transcript. Senator SPECTER. Well, I don't know about a transcript. You provided text to us of about 80 of your speeches, and in that speech
you talk about the clear and present danger test, or you talk about
Brandenburg and you talk about Justice Douglas 'comment to you,
and you make the statement here that you almost had pity, but
there is no question from the context of the speech at pages 9 and
19 that you stand firmly behind your opposition to the clear and
present danger test. Judge BORK. May I see it? The only thing I want to see is the
Judge Advocate General's School talk. That is the only one I don't
have. Senator SPECTER. YOU are welcome to it. Judge BORK. All right. Thank you. Senator SPECTER. Let me move on for a moment, and we can
come back to it, Judge Bork. Judge BORK. Well, let me just say this, Senator. If disagreement
on theoretical basis with a case you are willing to accept as an established precedent is somehow a problem, then I think every candidate who has thought about areas of the law is going to have a
problem. Because many cases we accept we don't agree with, and
that is just the nature—I don't think there are any two judges or
lawyers who would agree on all these matters. Senator SPECTER. Well, Judge Bork, that brings up the subject
down the line as to original intent and how firmly committed you
are to accepting stare decisis, and there are some strong statements
86-974 0 - 89 - 16
which you have made that an originalist ought not to accept, cases
which have been established because of the complexity of the
amendment process. That is a somewhat different discussion, but I
am concerned about your views for two reasons. One, the next case will have a shading and a nuance and I am
concerned about your philosophy and your approach. And, secondly, I am concerned about your acceptance of these cases. If you say
you accept this one, so be it. But you have written and spoken, ostensibly as an original interpretationist, of the importance of originalists not allowing the mistakes of the past to stand. Judge BORK. I think that I—I, obviously, have also said that the
commerce clause and the federal power generally was probably not
intended, but they have to stand because it is to late in the day to
overturn them—to much has happened, too much has grown up
around them: statutes, institutions, expectations, and so forth. I
have said that about a number of areas. So that any idea that an originalist, I don't think an originalist,
a person who believes in original intent, can do without a doctrine
of precedent; otherwise, he would be constantly trying to rip up the
nation and its laws, and you can't do that. Senator SPECTER. But you have made some very strong statements about changing precedents where they are at variance with
original intent.Judge BORK. Well, that certainly is one factor to be considered, no doubt about it. Senator SPECTER. Let us pick up the underlying thrust of your
criticism of the clear and present danger test because I think this
is very important in terms of where you go with the next case. Assuming, and I accept your statement that you agree, or were willing to apply Brandenburg and Hess v. Indiana, but the next
case Judge BORK. Well, I didn't speak to Hess v. Indiana, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Okay. How about Hess v Indiana? Judge BORK. All right. No, I am not so wild about Hess v Indiana. That is a case of obscenity in the public streets, and sometimes the Supreme Court allows people to stop obscenities, sometimes it doesn't. Senator SPECTER. Well, the Supreme Court decided Hess on the Brandenburg doctrine flat out. Judge BORK. But I think there was a problem of obscenity in there and not just the problem of inciting to lawlessness. Now, if
the gentleman had said what he said without the obscenities, that's
right, Brandenburg covers it. Senator SPECTER. Well, the Supreme Court said Brandenburg
governed Hess. Well, I have got a copy that I can make available to you. Judge BORK. All right. Senator SPECTER. We will come back to that. Let me move ahead
to the underpinnings of the clear and present danger test, and let
me read a very short extract from Holmes' dissenting opinion in
Abrams at page 630 of 270 United States Reports. And I think,
Judge Bork, this is really the essence of the first amendment freedom of speech, and this is the doctrine which you have character­ized as being "internally inconsistent" and being "terrifying frivolity."
But when men have realized that time has upset any fighting fates they may come to believe, even more than they believe the very foundations of their own con­duct, that the ultimate good desired is better reached by free trade in ideas, that the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competi­tion of the market, and that truth is the only ground upon which their wishes safely can be carried out. That, at any rate, is the theory of our Constitution.
Now you had very strongly criticized the Holmes statement which appears at page 20 of your Michigan Lav/ Review speech, and you say this:
There is doubt about even the proviso, for Holmes could bring himself to write in Gitlow, and Brandeis to join him, that, "If in the long run the beliefs expressed in proletarian dictatorship are destined to be accepted by the dominant forces of the community, the only meaning of free speech is that they should be given their chance and have their way." That statement and this is you speaking now defies explanation.
It seems to me, Judge Bork, in studying the long line of cases on
freedom of speech, that the essence of a lusty debate and full discourse is to let it go on and on and on until you reach the point of
imminent violence. And if there is imminent violence, then there is
a clear and present danger, and it stops and it becomes wrongful conduct, and it becomes criminal conduct.
But even in the context where the proponent argues the proletar­ian dictatorship, as much as we dislike it, we say, go ahead. Or
even as much as the proponent says, "Let's have a revolution to
get there," which is the advocacy of lawlessness which you also
condemn, that seems to me to be within the Holmes doctrine and a
proper description of the law and the spirit of freedom of speech.
Because if the person has to resort to violence in a democratic society, it shows the absurdity of his position, when he doesn't need under our system to resort to violence.
But as long as it is mere words, he ought to be permitted to say it, and that, as I read the cases and get the feel of the first amendment. And freedom of speech is really the core value, and is hardly frivolous.
Judge BORK. Senator, let me address Holmes' rationale—Holmes' reasoning, which I think defies explanation on his own terms. He is saying, and in this first part I agree with him entirely, that the first amendment is intended to protect free trade in ideas, and the test of their truth is their acceptance in the marketplace of ideas. That is fine.
Then he says it is all right for people to advocate revolution to shut the marketplace of ideas—to advocate violence by which a minority will seize the government and shut off the marketplace of
ideas. And he concludes that by saying,
If, in the long run, the beliefs expressed in proletarian dictatorship are destined to be accepted by the dominant forces of the community, the only meaning of free speech is they should be given their chance and have their way.
Dominant forces in the community is not a majority voting for
proletarian dictatorship, and the man who was speaking there was
not advocating an election to put in proletarian dictatorship. He
was advocating violence to close the marketplace of ideas. He was
advocating violence to close, to stop the free trade in ideas.
Now that it seems to me you can't get from "the most wonderful
thing about our society is the free trade in ideas" to "it's all right
for this fellow to try to get people to overthrow the government so
that they can close the free trade in ideas." Senator SPECTER. Well, I disagree categorically—if you don't get
to the point where violence is imminent, to argue that there ought
to be a proletarian dictatorship. It is a terrible system as you and I
see it, but on the merits, let him argue it. Judge BORK. Oh, I would let him argue it. Senator SPECTER. YOU would let him argue the proletarian dictatorship?Judge BORK. Oh, sure. I would let him argue it. Senator SPECTER. Why not let him argue violence if it doesn't
come to a point of inciting to violence? Isn't the very argument,
itself, undercutting any rationality of the argument? Judge BORK. NO. The Senator SPECTER. AS long as there is no violence that is imminent. Judge BORK. Well, one—Sanford's point, a point I think that had
some merit to it, is that if you get a lot of these arguments going
on you don't know when violence is imminent. A lot of this is conspiratorial and advocacy taking place in organizations that organize like military units. Now it does seem to me, or it seemed to me then and I suppose it
seems to me now, that it would be a defensible first amendment
position to say that whether or not there is a real danger to our
form of government and to our freedoms and to our free speech
posed by this kind of thing, advocacy of violence to close the marketplace of ideas, is a legislative judgment, and they may choose to
let that speech go forward or not. That was what I said then, and it
seems to me it is a tenable philosophical position now. However, I have also said that, that is, the settled law has
become otherwise. The Holmes-Brandeis position has triumphed in
the law, and Brandenburg, while it is different from the clear and
present danger test, and you can tell that because the clear and
present danger test was applied in the Dennis cases, you know, the
Smith Act cases about the Communist Party, and Brandenburg
would not uphold the Smith Act—the Dennis case, we have now
come to the Brandenburg test. And I think, as I have said, I don't
know, if we were starting over again, that I wouldn't have agreed
with Sanford in the first place. I mean, a majority of the Supreme
Court agreed with it. All I am telling you is I now accept, as a judge, the position that
the law has reached, and I have no desire to overturn it. I have no
desire to whittle it away. But that does not mean that I have abandoned my original critique of those theories. I haven't even thought
about them again, much less abandoned them. Senator SPECTER. Well, when you talk about Brandenburg being
different from the clear and present danger test, I don't think it is,
and that is not the way you wrote it.
Judge BORK. Well, it is. May I see that? Do you have the Dennis
case there?
Senator SPECTER. Well, this is what you said, analyzing the doctrine at the University of Michigan, at page 20 going onto 21:
"The Holmes-Brandeis position held that virtually the only harm
caused by speech that society can protect itself against is the prospect of imminent violence. After much weaving through such cases
of Dennis and Yates, that reading was imposed upon the first
amendment in the last year of the Warren Court in Brandenburg
v. Ohio." So you flatly say there, as a matter of analysis, that Brandenburg does pick up the Holmes-Brandeis doctrine of clear and
present danger. Judge BORK. Well, I may have said that there, Senator, and I
may have misspoken. Because I think if you look at what Dennis y.
United States did, how it interpreted clear and present danger, it
said—they picked up Judge Learned Hand's definition of clear and
present danger. Senator SPECTER. Well, Judge Learned Hand's definition was picked up in a plurality opinion by Chief Justice Vinson, but that
wasn't the opinion of the Court; there weren't five Justices. And
the Frankfurter concurrence deals with clear and present danger
in great detail. Judge BORK. Um-hum. Senator SPECTER. And it is running through the Frankfurter concurrence and it runs through the Jackson concurrence, and it is
really the dominant theme of the case. Judge BORK. Well, the plurality opinion says—and I can't find it
here because this is not my Senator SPECTER. It picks up Judge Learned Hand's defini­tion Judge BORK. Yes. The Florida opinion says that you must look at
the gravity of the danger Senator SPECTER. Play it against the evils. Judge BORK.—Discounted by the probability of its occurrence,
and that is not the Brandenburg decision. Because under that version of clear and present danger, which is one version of it that it
seems to me quite possible to hold, under that version of clear and
present danger there may be no imminent act. It may be quite a
way down the road. But if the danger is greater enough, that
doesn't matter. Now, Brandenburg said we need a closer connection between the
speech and the danger. We need a closer nexus. It has to be imminent lawlessness. So I think Brandenburg does differ from at least
the way Hand and a plurality of the Supreme Court interpreted
clear and present danger. Senator SPECTER. AS we have already agreed, you had taken the position in a scholarly analysis before that Brandenburg was the
Holmes-Brandeis clear and present danger test. Let me move on. We don't have a great deal of time, Judge Bork.
Let me pick up the question of equal protection of the law.
Here again, it may be that the short explanation is that you
have shifted from your writings, as recently as 1984 Judge BORK. Senator, may I interject there? Senator SPECTER. Sure. Judge BORK. I think our discussion of Brandenburg and clear and
present danger demonstrates that I have not shifted from my writings. I have said that, as a judge, I accept those cases as precedent and will apply them. It's settled law. That's all I've said. I haven't
said that these writings were wrong. I have said that I accept that
body of precedent and will apply it. That's all I've said. Senator SPECTER. Well, when the next case arises and it's distinguishable from Brandenburg, where will you be? Judge BORK. It depends, Senator, entirely on what the next case
is and what it shows. Senator SPECTER. Well, that's the reason that judicial philosophy
is so important. If you have a judicial philosophy, there is some
predictability as to where you'll be when the next set of facts
comes up which are different than Brandenburg. No two cases are
identical. Judge BORK. NO, that's right. Senator SPECTER. The application of a legal philosophy very
much depends upon the way it is held, and that's why, if you still
disagree philosophically with Brandenburg, and you still disagree
philosophically with the clear and present danger test, that raises
a question in my mind as to how you will apply it to the next set of
facts. Judge BORK. Well, I'll apply it as honestly as I can. That's all I
can say to you. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, let's go to the equal protection
clause, which I consider to be a very central matter. Here again, it
may be the same line of consideration. As recently as this year, June 10, 1987—it's the Worldnet comment, and this is at page 12, where you talk about the equal protection clause. You say, "I do think the equal protection clause probably should have been kept to things like race and ethnicity", and
back in the Indiana Law Review you had written in stronger terms
that the equal protection clause applied only to race. My first question is, if you work from the framers' intent, and
you have said that the framers' intent covered only race, how do
you even justify covering ethnic distinctions? How do you even justify the Yick Wo case in 1886 involving the Chinaman who had applied for a license to have a laundry and got turned down in San
Francisco? Can you imagine not having Chinese laundries Judge BORK. Yeah. That was a race Senator SPECTER. The case goes to the Supreme Court and they
say equal protection applies. Now, if you're an originalist, and original intent governs, and
original intent was only to cover race, which you say flatly in the
Indiana Law Review, how can you apply equal protection to ethnics? Judge BORK. Well, I take it that Chinese people are a racial classification.
Senator SPECTER. Well, you're not saying that that's within the
intentment of the equal protection clause passed after the Civil
War; the Civil War didn't involve the Chinese.
Judge BORK. NO, it didn't. It certainly didn't. But the equal protection clause clearly covers whites, and I think the framers
Senator SPECTER. Does it clearly cover whites under original
intent?
Judge BORK. Yeah, I think it does, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Where does that come from?
Judge BORK. From the statements of the people who were in­volved in drafting it and ratifying it.
Senator SPECTER. That there was an intent by the drafters and ratifiers of the equal protection clause of the 14th amendment, to give equal protection to whites?
Judge BORK. Yes.
But let me go on with that, Senator, because
Senator SPECTER. Where?
Judge BORK. Well, I don't have the citations in front of me. If you look at Congressman Bingham's discussions, he, of course, talked about almost everything that it covered. But he is not the
only one. He merely proposed the amendment, and he proposed—
By the way, he thought it incorporated the Bill of Rights against the States.
If you go to the ratifiers, there's a great deal of talk about vari­ous things. If one approaches the amendment by saying it applies
to groups, and you have to decide which group is covered and
which group is not covered, then I think you're going to have to
say they were talking about race and perhaps, as Justice Rehnquist has said, race-like things, whatever those are.
Now, there is a difficulty with that, and the difficulty is that the text doesn't read that way. But more than that, the fact is that the
Supreme Court, for all of this century and perhaps before, has
come up with a reasonable basis test so that they have applied the
equal protection clause under that test to everything, even to economic distinctions. If you take the reasonable basis test seriously,
which they have not always done, when they called it a rationality
standard, if you take the reasonable basis test seriously, then the
clause applies to the reasonableness of all distinctions between
people and it applies to things well beyond race. That is settled doctrine and it's been going on for a long time now. It doesn't require
you to say which groups are in and which groups are out, which is the way the Supreme Court was approaching it.
Senator SPECTER. But, Judge Bork, if you accept that, you're to­tally away from original intent, which was for blacks, as you wrote
it, and for blacks as a racial issue. It doesn't talk about—that
doesn't include women, it doesn't include illegitimates, it doesn't
include indigents, it doesn't include a whole pile of equal protection clause cases.
Absent the equal protection clause, you would find no basis for striking a State law simply because it didn't have a reasonable
basis on a public interest, a classification logically related to achieving a legitimate State interest.
Judge BORK. NO. I think the equal protection clause is the pri­mary, if not the sole, way to approach those things. What I am
trying to say is that there is a settled line of Supreme Court precedent running back at least 90 years which adopts a reasonable
basis test and applies the equal protection clause to all kinds of things.
Senator SPECTER. NO doubt about that. And the Court, in doing that, has departed totally from the original intent of the framers
and the ratifiers. The framers and ratifiers did not have women in
mind, did not have illegitimates in mind, did not have poor people
in mind, did not have Mexicans in mind, did not have Chinese in
mind. So I think the Court is right, and I'm certainly not objecting
to that interpretation of the equal protection clause. But what I am
trying to do is square that with your very forceful statement that you are going to carry out original intent.
Judge BORK. Well, I have also said, Senator, that anybody who tries to follow original intent must also have a respect for prece­dent, because some things it's too late to change.
Now, the application of the equal protection clause to all kinds of people other than racial groups is so settled, and so many expecta­tions have grown up around that, so many segments of our popula­tion have internalized that kind of protection, so many institutions are built on it, that it's an interpretation that should not be over­turned.
Senator SPECTER. Are you saying, then, that you will apply equal protection to women, just as the Court currently does? Judge BORK. Yes. In fact, I said this morning, I think twice, in
different questioning, that I think a reasonable basis test gives you
the same results as to gender that the Supreme Court has been reaching.
Senator SPECTER. HOW about the strict scrutiny test, classifica­tion necessary to protect a compelling State interest?
Judge BORK. Well, that's what I was objecting to, Senator.
There are two methodologies
Senator SPECTER. That's really the essence of equal protection,
though, isn't it? If you use the reasonable basis test, a rational
basis, pretty much everything is stricken, that there is always something that can be conjured up as a rational basis?
Judge BORK. NO, no, Senator. They did that, and I objected to it. I think I objected to it in the Indiana article, because they begin to imagine rational bases.
For example, I cited the cases—I cited critically in the Indiana article. They upheld the statute that said women couldn't be bartenders unless they were related to a male owner or proprietor of
the bar. I thought that was a ridiculous distinction and I criticized it.
There are two methodologies. Let me be as clear as I can about this. One is to say we will pick a group and say which level of scrutiny does it get. It is often said that race distinctions get strict scru­tiny and require a compelling governmental interest.
Then there is intermediate scrutiny. Then there is rational basis, which is not what I'm talking about on an unreasonable basis.
Those are almost conclusions. You know if they get strict scrutiny,
the statute is going to be struck down. You know if it gets rationality scrutiny, it's going to be upheld. In the intermediate case, the intermediate level of scrutiny, you
don't know what they're going to do. There is no predictability to
it.
I prefer to apply a reasonableness basis test to all of those levels,
and the result of that is that distinctions based on race almost
never will be reasonable, except in the most urgent circumstances.
Distinctions based upon gender will rarely be reasonable because,
in our society, as we now view the place of women in society, only
extreme cases based upon biological differences would probably be
upheld. I mean, things like women in combat, only men in combat.
437
Senator SPECTER. My time is up. Let me just make a final obser­vation.
What troubles me as I hear your testimony, after having studied your writings and your opinions, is the very significant and pronounced shifts. You start as a socialist, you become a libertarian, you write a theory of constitutional law in 1968, as you described yesterday; you change that in 1971 on neutral principles; you ar­ticulate that doctrine in many speeches, dozens of speeches, through the seventies and through the eighties. You are willing to assure us that you will apply Brandenburg, which you think is fun­damentally wrong, and a drastic change from your other writing.
The concern I have is, where's the predictability in Judge Bork? What are the assurances that this committee and the Senate has
as to where you will be given the background and this history. I
don't know that you can really answer that, but I would be pleased to hear your comments.
Judge BORK. In the first place, Senator, the fact that as a teen­ager and into my early twenties I was a socialist hardly seems to
me to indicate fundamental instability. As Winston Churchill, I
think it was, said, "Any man who's not a socialist before he's 40
has no heart, and any man who is a socialist after he's 40 has no head." 
I think that kind of evolution is very common in people, very common. Now, the original intent philosophy I have been publishing now
for 16 years, and I don't intend to move from it. Other things—
Brandenburg, I have not shifted. I have said to you that I would
have thought, as an initial matter, that advocacy of law violation
could be prohibited when you're not using it to test the constitu­tionality of a statute.
I have also said the Supreme Court added to that the fact that advocacy of law violation may be prohibited if lawless behavior is
imminent. I don't think they needed to add that. I am willing to accept the fact that they added that, as a judge. And my first obli­gation as a judge is not to write theoretical essays; it is to decide cases and keep the law, insofar as possible, stable and continuous.
Senator SPECTER. Judge, how can you say that you're standing by original intent when you say that you're prepared to accept the Supreme Court decisions on equal protection which have deviated to­tally from original intent?
Judge BORK. YOU see, I don't know, Senator, that that's entirely true. I think they were thinking about race. But I think they may
have also thought about reasonableness. I'm not sure. I'm not an
expert on this. But in any event Senator SPECTER. Wait a minute. You have written flat out—and
this isn't a matter of accepting a Supreme Court opinion; this is a
scholarly work, where you say that when the equal protection
clause of the 14th amendment was adopted, the framers and the
ratifiers had race in mind and race only.
Do you now think they had something else in mind?
Judge BORK. I don't know. I do not know that history. There's
been a lot of historical research since then and I'm not relying
upon original intent. What I am relying upon is a mode of analysis
that the Supreme Court instituted in the last century. It seems to me a little late for anybody to tear that up, even if it doesn't
square with original intent. That's what I'm saying to you.
There are established doctrines that—somebody may go and examine the history of the 14th amendment and say that doctrine
really isn't supported by the original intent. But if it's established Senator SPECTER. It's too late to tear up the doctrine of privacy? Judge BORK. We will face that when we come to it, Senator. I
have told you how I would face it. Senator SPECTER. We're facing all these other matters this afternoon. Judge BORK. NO, but some things are absolutely settled in the
law. I have told you what they are. I have told you that the incorporation doctrine is; I have told you the commerce clause is and so
forth. These are things of not only long standing but all kinds of
things have grown up around them. Any judge understands that
you don't tear those things up. When you ask me about a current controversial issue, I cannot,
and I should not, give you an answer. Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much. The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Illinois. Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank my colleague,
Senator Heflin, for yielding to me, and I yield briefly to Senator
DeConcini for a statement. Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, I have just been contacted by
former Dean Paul Marcus of the University of Arizona. He has informed me that no one has secured his approval for his name to
appear on the list of the Senator from Utah published here a few
minutes ago of 100 select law professors. He has not taken any position in favor of or in opposition to Judge Bork. He is sending me
a letter stating that and has copied Judge Bork on that matter. But
he is concerned that he is being represented as supporting Judge
Bork and he takes no such position. I wanted the record to show this.
Senator HATCH. Let me say this. It is my understanding that he
was, but if that's so, there are still 99 there. We will check on that
and we'll go with the 99, because they're all eminent, every one of
them are good, and I would hope he will reconsider as he considers
Judge Bork's testimony here. Senator DECONCINI. I thank the Senator from Illinois. The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Illinois. Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Judge Bork, I was a little startled to hear your response to Senator Leahy on the pro bono work. One of the things that is important for a Justice on the Court, or a judge on the federal bench, to
have is some understanding for those less fortunate in our society.
Are there other things that you have done with the less fortunate in your 60 years of work, helping or volunteering to work
with the retarded or whatever it may be? Judge BORK. NO, Senator, I can't claim a record of that sort.
Now, if you ask me do I know anything about such people, obviously I do, through a variety of ways—not the retarded in particular, but obviously I do through a variety of life experiences. But I
have not done what you suggest.
Senator SIMON. I thank you. Let me turn to another area of concern, and that is something we discussed yesterday. I said, One point, at a speech at Berkeley in 1985, you say "What a court adds to one person's constitutional rights, it subtracts from the rights of others."
That's a quote. Do you believe that is always true? Judge BOEK. Yes, Senator, I think it's a matter of plain arithmetic. I think our Constitution gives a constitutional right or a liberty in areas where the Bill of Rights or the Civil War amendments don't prohibit it, citizens to sit down and elect their representatives and make their laws. If a court strikes down such laws on behalf of a plaintiff claiming liberty, it auto­matically deprives the first group of its liberty. So what you're talking about here is a redistribution of liberty.
My concern is that we're not just talking about taking two or­anges off a shelf and shifting them to another shelf, that there is no arithmetical equality here. Let's use the case we used yesterday, of slavery. When you take away the liberty of a slave owner to have slaves, and grant liberty to those who are slaves, while I sup­pose you are taking one right away from the slave owner, the dis­parity is so great that it is important that that liberty be granted.
Judge BORK. Oh, it is. I entirely agree with you. Senator SIMON. SO when you say "I think it's a matter of plain arithmetic "
Judge BORK. Well, obviously, if you tell somebody he has a right against somebody else, the other person loses something. That's all. That is standard legal analysis. I don't think there's any question about it.
The fact is that in the case of slavery, we have the 13th amend­ment because we thought it was important to give slaves rights. We have the 14th amendment because we thought it was impor­tant to give former slaves rights, and the 15th amendment on voting rights was equally because we wanted to shift power or rights away from a ruling class that had it and give it to an under­class that needed it.
I have no objection to that. I just say that one must recognize that when you—when a community passes a law because it, say, wants to prohibit something, and the court says that law is invalid, it gives the people who object to the law liberty and takes it away from the folks who wanted the law.
That's fine, and I like it, if it's in the Constitution. The Constitu­tion itself redistributes rights and it's intended to, and it should. The only thing I have ever objected to was the court doing it with­out constitutional authority.
Senator SIMON. But when you look at the Constitution, you're not looking at the Tax Code. If you're writing a Tax Code, and if you grant some group 1 billion dollars' worth of exemptions, you eliminate 1 billion over on the other side. You recognize that?
Judge BORK. Of course. But I was not saying that the liberties of the two groups are of equal value. We redistribute liberties all of the time, not only through the Constitution but through statutes, regulations and so forth. That's the way government operates.
But what I was objecting to in that speech was the rhetoric, that every time the Court makes up a new right, it enlarges liberty—
well, it does for one group, but it diminishes it for another group.
That's all I was saying. Senator SIMON. I guess my concern is, as I hear it, you seem to
almost equate the two. Judge BORK. No. Senator SIMON. All right. Judge BORK. Let me back up. It may be—one has to mention various categories. It may be, if
the Constitution says you may not do this to this minority, and the
Constitution says that frequently about various kinds of minorities,
then that's fine. The Constitution has made the determination that
the rights are to be there and not with the larger group. That's
fine. That's exactly what constitutional law is about. If a court, without guidance from the Constitution, says to an individual or a minority that "you may not be regulated in this
way", then the court has redistributed the liberties without authority from the Constitution. It is wrong to say they have just increased liberty. They may or they may not. They've certainly redistributed liberty.My only point was that a court has no authority to do that without constitutional mandate. Senator SIMON. I have long thought that it is fundamental in our
society, that when you expand the liberty of any of us, you expand
the liberty of all of us. Judge BORK. I think, Senator, that is not correct. For example, to take an example that I think most people would
recognize—and we've been around this, and I don't mean to keep
harping on this one example, but it's an obvious example. If a community decides that it wants to ban certain forms of obscenity, because that obscenity impacts on their children, their family life
and attitudes and the moral environment, and if a court should
come along and say you may not ban that obscenity, so that the
practice of showing obscene materials and so forth increases, I
think the majority has lost some liberties. Not everybody's liberty
has been expanded. Now, we can differ about that, but it seems to me fairly evident.
One of the great liberties we have is to govern ourselves through
representative bodies like the Senate and the House of Representatives. If a court takes that away from us, we've lost a liberty. A
court ought to take it away from us if the Constitution says so. It
ought not if the Constitution does not say so. It should leave us the
liberty of electing our Representatives and Senators and having
them make public policy for us. Senator SIMON. Then we get back to the exchange you had with
Senator Specter here, where if I follow you correctly, and please
correct me on this—you go back to original intent, but you accept
precedent for the Chinese, for others, under the equal protection
clause. But you are not willing to create the precedent in behalf of
liberty.Judge BORK. Yes, I am. Under the equal protection clause,
since—Once you begin to operate, as the Court has, and as John
Paul Stevens suggests, with a reasonable basis test which would
produce the same results in race and gender, as the Court currently gets through its multi-tier analysis, then as various challenges come up under the equal protection clause, the question will be
whether this is a reasonable distinction or whether it's an outmoded stereotype of some sort. If a new challenge is made by a new group, then I would create
precedent, obviously, if I apply that test as I said I would. The Constitution says any person, and if you look at—that any person is
protected under the equal protection clause—if you look at the language, which an original intention person should, I think you're
driven to a reasonable basis test. Now, I am sure that the framers of that 14th amendment did not
think that the way women were treated in those days was unreasonable. That was seen to them very natural. Now, as women's
place in society has changed, all of those distinctions that they
made and thought were entirely reasonable now look to us unreasonable. That's the way constitutional doctrine evolves. Senator SIMON. Let me again read—and I recognize you have
changed your opinions from this Indiana Law Review article,
which you have heard more about in the last three days than you
probably want to—but let me just read a few sentences here. "Compare the facts in Griswold with a hypothetical suit by an
electric utility company " Judge BORK. Could I have the page, please, Senator, so I can
follow you?Senator SIMON. It is pages 9 and 10. Judge BORK. All right. I'm sorry to stop you. Senator SIMON. "Compare the facts in Griswold with a hypothetical suit by—" this is the case where the law outlaws the use of contraceptives "—with a hypothetical suit by an electric utility company and one of its customers to void a smoke pollution ordinance as
unconstitutional. The cases are identical." Now, I could go on and
read the rest. But you say "It is clear that the court cannot make
the necessary distinction." Do you really believe that in one case, where a couple uses contraceptives and the majority in the court rules that that is unconstitutional, that that is really identical with an electric utility company violating a smoke pollution ordinance? Judge BORK. Let's be—I must be very clear about what that
means, because it is explained in the pages that follow. We are now
talking about a case—Let me back up. As a legislator, if I were a legislator, I would clearly vote for the
smoke pollution ordinance and I would vote against the anti-contraceptive ordinance, and as a citizen I would oppose the anti-contraceptive statute and I would vote for the smoke pollution statute. I am talking here about two cases in which, if there is no constitutional objection to either statute, then a judge has no way of imposing his moral preferences upon the Constitution. That's all I'm
saying. I'm saying the judge may not have a hierarchy of values
that does not come from the Constitution. He may not say to a consumer, "You value your low-cost electricity, but that's an ignoble
value, whereas the other is a noble value" unless the Constitution
tells him to make that choice. A legislator can make that moral distinction because a legislator
is responsive to the people and must make moral choices all the
time. I think a judge is supposed to enforce the morality of the people who made the law—in this case, the Constitution. That is
the only reason I say the judge has no way to tell those two cases
apart if the Constitution does not speak. Senator SIMON. But I guess that gets back to whether you use
the Constitution to expand liberty, as Justice Harlan indicated in
that quotation I read yesterday. My hope is that the courts,
through the decades ahead, will, where it is prudent, see that we
can expand liberty, the right of privacy and other things. My concern, as I look at your record and a host of things, is you
are moving, perhaps somewhat reluctantly, and if not reluctantly,
then after the fact, accepting the decisions and the precedents of
the Court, but not leading in seeing that people have these rights. Is that an inaccurate reading of the record?
Judge BORK. Well, the difficulty with the record is that I wrote
only about what I regarded as excesses by the Supreme Court. I did
not write about the ones that I thought were approving. As a
matter of fact, over the period of years I was discussing, I don't
suppose I was criticizing more than one or two Supreme Court
cases a year. When they made a proper expansion of liberty, I did
not sit down and write an approving article. Perhaps I should have.
It was only when I thought a principle or a mode of decision that
was coming into the law was not justified that I wrote an article. That is why you will not see the other side. But, you know, I
have said there are a lot of opinions that I—I approve of most Supreme Court opinions. Some of them expand liberty. Senator SIMON. I thank you, Judge. Let me just add again my concern, that through the courts, as
well as through the House and Senate, and through the White
House, that we provide leadership in protecting the rights we have
and expanding that base of rights. I want those on the Court,
where that leadership has been so important, to be sensitive to the
less fortunate, sensitive to those who sometimes are unprotected in
our society. Judge BORK. Well, Senator, we had a discussion this morning—
not you and I—in which I pointed to my record as Solicitor General
and my record on the court of appeals, which has been—as I said, I
have the material here and I will submit it for the record later—
which has been, in seven out of eight cases, involving claims by
racial minorities or by women, in seven out of eight cases I have
voted for the racial minority or the women. I have a lot of labor union cases in which I voted for the labor
union. There simply is no reason to expect that I will not continue
to do that. I wouldn't have done it in the first place if I didn't
think the law called for it. Senator SIMON. Thank you, Judge. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from South Carolina. Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, I just want to commend you for
being so frank and open with your testimony. You have answered
all the questions, and you have answered them not one time but
three or four times. You have proven that you're a real scholar and
we are proud of you. I think you will make a great Justice.
That's all, Mr. Chairman.
Judge BORK. Thank you, Senator.
The CHAIRMAN. The hearing is recessed until tomorrow morning at 10:00 o'clock.
 
 
 
 
 
NOMINATION OF ROBERT H. BORK TO BE ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 1987
U.S. SENATE, COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:10 a.m., in room SR-325, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Biden, Jr., chairman of the committee, presiding.
Also, present. Senators Thurmond, Kennedy, Heflin, Leahy, Metzenbaum, Simpson, Hatch, Grassley, Humphrey, DeConcini, Specter.
The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order.
Welcome, Judge. As I said yesterday, with the grace of God and the good will of the neighbors and short questions and short an­swers, we just may get finished today. That is my hope.
Senator Leahy has indicated that he would like the floor for a minute, and I will yield to him in a minute. After that, we will then begin this morning's questioning with Senator Heflin. Then we will move to Senator Humphrey. Then we will start a third round of questioning.
I yield to the Senator from Vermont.
Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Judge Bork. Judge BORK. Good morning. Senator LEAHY. There is something that you and I spoke about
last night that I would like to mention publicly today. I think a lawyer's pro bono obligations under the canons of ethics are, of course, a legitimate question for any nominee. But I am certainly sorry that my line of questioning may have evoked some painful memories for you. As I said yesterday, it is perfectly proper for you to have consultant fees. In fact, they are an indication, I believe, of your stature in the field of antitrust.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Judge BORK. Thank you, Senator.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Heflin.
Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Chairman, first I would like to commend you for the way that you have handled the hearings. I think you have been eminently fair. Frankly, I think you have even leaned backwards every now and then, I would guess. I think that some of my colleagues in the Democratic Party ought to have their heads
(445)
knocked a little bit, and there ought to have been a little hair pulling on the other side over there in regards to matters. Senator LEAHY. Some of us could not stand the hair pulling. Senator HEFLIN. Anyway, I think you have been eminently fair,
and I say that I have the greatest confidence in your integrity and
your honesty.The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. Senator HEFLIN. Judge Bork, I believe we have pretty well covered the waterfront on the various judicial theories, except that I
do not recall that anyone has questioned you about the concept of
incorporating certain parts of the Bill of Rights into the due process clause of the 14th amendment. That has been a highly debated and controversial area of jurisprudence particularly with i;he Warren Court, and there were efforts made, I think, first, to try to go through the privileges and
immunities clause. Then they developed the concept of the due
process clause and the various writings that had differed pertaining to that. Would you give us your feelings of whether or not this was judicial activism, judicial imperialism, or what is your feeling pertaining to the reasoning that took place in the sort of selective incorporation theory?Judge BORK. Senator Heflin, the historical evidence on that is
still coming in. When I first went into teaching, I think the received wisdom was the article by Professor Fairman that appeared
in the Harvard Law Review, arguing that there really was not any
historical evidence for incorporation. He was responding to Justice
Black's opinion in the area. Since then, there has been more evidence that incorporation was intended. Now, it is perfectly clear, when we say "incorporation," as you
and I know but maybe not everybody who is listening to us does,
we are talking about the theory that the due process clause of the
14th amendment applies against the States the Bill of Rights which
originally applied only to the federal government. Since then, as I
say, there has been more evidence which tends to show that incorporation was intended. It is very clear that Congressman Bingham,
who wrote much of the clause and managed it in the House, and
Senator Howard, I think it is, who was the member of the committee that drafted it and was the floor manager in the Senate—both
of them clearly intended to incorporate not just the Bill of Rights
but any personal protection to be found in the Constitution, including the original Constitution. So there is some pretty good historical evidence that it was intended. There is an argument whether the ratifying conventions
understood that or not. I do not know the answer to that, but it
seems to me that now the Court has done it. It seems to me that
there is some evidence that what they did was correct.
In any event, it seems to me a beneficial development and thoroughly established, and I do not think anybody really wants to see
the States free of the Bill of Rights. And as I say, I think there is
considerable historical evidence that it was intended, some that it
was not.
Senator HEFLIN. Well, I have not found and my staff has not
found—and as far as I know, nobody else has found—that during
the period that this was developing that you wrote anything that
was basically critical of the doctrine at that time. Do you recall
ever writing anything pertaining to that aspect? Judge BORK. No, I do not, Senator. I have mostly read secondary sources. I read the Fairman article, and Professor John Ely, who
was recently dean of the Stanford Law School, wrote a book which
I read since then. He says that the evidence is not as clear as Fair-
man made it. In fact, they have some evidence, much evidence for incorporation.
I have never written about it. I have never examined the original sources. I think there is some historical support for it, and it is a
thoroughly established doctrine and it will stay that way. Senator HEFLIN. In some of your writings and in your testimony you have used the term "judicial imperialism." It seems to me you
make a distinction between judicial activism and judicial imperial­ism.
Do you see a distinction? And if so, what is the distinction that you have used and the context that you have used it? Judge BORK. It is just a distinction. I do not want anybody to think that I think courts should be passive and not defend individual liberties. They should be very active in that field. I prefer the
word "imperialism" to describe a process which they should not do,
which is to intrude upon, encroach upon the proper province of the legislature.
Senator HEFLIN. Well, is it with more emphasis that you use the words "judicial imperialism" as opposed to "judicial activism"? Judge BORK. Well, activism does not mean the same thing as imperialism to me. As I say, courts should be active in enforcing the
Constitution and the statutes. I do not believe in a passive court that just sits there and defers to everybody.
On the other hand, imperialism implies that somebody is taking over territory that does not belong to them. That is what I mean when a court takes over a territory that belongs to the legislature.
Senator HEFLIN. In an article in the "District Lawyer," which was an interview between you and an attorney you made some
comments on stare decisis, which means let the decision stand.
Sometimes I think we get very legalistic here, and the public that
is watching may have to run to the dictionary. If it is not a law
dictionary, they may not find some of these terms. Maybe we will
try to explain the term of precedents and the concept which is a
very strong one, it provides certainty to the law and predictability
to affairs of persons, we follow the concept of let the decision stand
after they have been decided. I think maybe we should illustrate
that. Anyway, you were asked a question in that article, and the question was:
That suggests that the principle of stare decisis may be less weighty in constitu­tional matters than in statutory matters. Is that your view?
And your answer was,
That has been the practice of courts throughout our history, and I am not pre­pared to say it is wrong. There are some constitutional decisions around which so many other institutions and people have built, that they have become part of the structure of the nation. They ought not to be overturned even if thought to be wrong. The example I usually give, because I think it is non-controversial, is a broad interpretation of the commerce power by the courts. So many statutes, regulations, governmental institutions, private expectations and so forth have been built up around the broad interpretation of the commerce clause that it would be too late even if a Justice or a judge became certain that the broad interpretation is wrong as a matter of original intent to tear it up and overturn it.
I assume that you still agree with your statement that is made
there. Judge BORK. Oh, I certainly do, Senator, and I have previously in many speeches expressed that point. As we have discussed here, it
is not just the commerce clause, but the legal tender cases, the incorporation doctrine and so forth now part of the fabric of the
nation. Senator HEFLIN. Then the question is, But subject to that kind of prudential restraint where people have relied on prece­dents, a body of legal doctrine, your views would be that a Justice is entitled as a part of his responsibility to re-examine constitutional questions de novo.
Answer, I would think that is true of a judge and true of a law court judge unless he is bound by a Supreme Court precedent. After all, there are a lot of considerations that go into it. But at the bottom, a judge's basic obligation or basic duty is to the Constitution, not simply the precedent.
Now, is that your thinking still today? Judge BORK. Yes; that is a very conventional view, Senator. I have here quotations from Justice Brandeis and Justice Douglas.
That has been the court's practice. I learned that in the first year
of law school that judges respect precedent in all fields, but somewhat less so in constitutional law than they do in statutory law. I
remember I learned that in my first class from then Professor
Edward Levi, later Attorney General, among many other things.
And it is in his book, "Introduction to Legal Reasoning." The Supreme Court has always said that, and many Justices
have said that. That is conventional wisdom. Senator HEFLIN. In April of this year, to the Philadelphia Society, you delivered a speech which has been entitled "Bork's Wave
Theory of Law Reform." Judge BORK. I do not think that was my title, Senator. Somebody
else put that title on there. Senator HEFLIN. Well, maybe it was entitled "A Crisis in Constitutional Theory: Back to the Future." Judge BORK. That was the title, yes. Senator HEFLIN. Well, now, in that speech—I have been trying to
get it and I just got it—basically, as I understand it, these words
were contained—and if you have a copy of that speech, they are
excerpts from it.
Judge BORK. I have a copy, Senator. Do you have a page number? Senator HEFLIN. Well, I just got this. There was an article in the National Review that had excerpts where part of it was left out, that sort of thing. So my question is framed at the time and the context of that as well as other writings that we have had, well, sort of excerpts from it. If it is not fairly presented to you, let me know. I want to be completely fair. But this is basically what I
gather the speech contained. What are the chances of restoring legitimacy to constitutional theory? I think they are excellent. My confidence is largely due to a law of nature I recently discovered. To future generations, this will be known and revered as Bork's Wave Theory of Law Reform. The courts addressed what they regarded as serious social problems after World War II, and often did so without regard to any recognizable theory of constitutional interpretation. A tradition of looking to original intention was shat­tered. Constitutional theorists from academies, in sympathy with the courts, politi­cally began to construct theories to justify what was happening. So was non-origina­lism born. That wave has become a tsunami—
As I understand it, that is a hurricane wave—
Tsunami, and its intellectual and moral excesses are breathtaking. These theo­rists exhort the courts to unprecedented, imperialistic adventures, but the second wave is rising. When I first wrote on original intent in 1971, one of my colleagues at Yale told a young visiting professor not to bother with it because the position was passe. So, indeed, it was. But it is more than passe. It was, I think, the future as well. There are many more younger people often associated with the Federalist Soci­ety and who are of that philosophy and who plan to go into law teaching. It may take 10 years, it may take 20 years for the second wave to crest, but crest it will, and it will sweep the elegant, erudite, pretentious and toxic detritus of non-origina­lism out to sea.
Judge BORK. That was an after-dinner speech, Senator.
Senator LEAHY. It must have been one heck of a dinner.
Senator HEFLIN. Of course, that causes me concern that you have got an agenda which would, in effect, be contrary to somewhat of your previous statements on stare decisis.
Judge BORK. Senator, may I answer that?
Senator HEFLIN. Yes.
Judge BORK. I am not talking here at all about adhering to the law or to precedent. I am talking here about the way constitutional
theory is taught in the law schools. You will find that most of the
writing now urges that one form or another of a moral philosophy is the way the Constitution should be made up.
When I said that "Constitutional theorists from the academies are exhorting the courts to unprecedented, imperialistic adventures"—and they are—I am talking here about people of an opposite point of view of philosophy of original intention are going into
teaching, and I think they are going to win the argument in the
academy. I am not talking about sweeping past precedent out to
sea. I am talking about sweeping the philosophy of non-originalism,
of making up the Constitution out of moral philosophy out to sea.
This is not at all a discussion of what we are going to do with the
cases the Court has decided. Senator HEFLIN. Well, I have just gotten the copy of your full
speech. In the text of the way it was written in certain publications, it could be construed as this is an agenda if I get on the Court.
Judge BORK. NO, no, Senator. This entire speech is a talk about constitutional theorists in the academy. I said on page 3, "The nonoriginalists or non-interpretive theorists now dominate constitutional debate," and later on in the past that you quoted, I said,
"They are urging the Court on to greater adventures," and they are urging the courts on to greater adventures.
But the people I dealt with, for example, I disagreed here. The first person I disagreed with who had a non-originalist philosophy
originally when he started out was Prof. Alexander Bickel, my
good friend. This entire business is about legal academics. I think if
you read it you will see it is an argument with professors about how to deal with the Constitution. That dramatic language about
sunamis and sweeping the toxis de tractus out to sea is about the
theories that are current in the academy, which I must say no
court has even gone anywhere near as far as some professors think
they should, and are urging them to, to create constitutional law. Senator HEFLIN. Well, you mentioned some judges in it following
this concept. I want to read it, and then I may ask some more questions about it later on, the full speech. Judge BORK. All right. Senator HEFLIN. It is sometimes that publications of certain persuasion write it as showing some sort of appeal to their readers. Judge BORK. That could be. Senator HEFLIN. SO it may well be that in the presentation form
it may well have been misrepresented. I continue to look at you, your complexities, look at your opposition, and there are certain aspects of this that give me problems.
One. for example, is that you came up for Solicitor General. Most
of the writings that have been referred here today were writings
that occurred before that time. You were questioned somewhat
about some of those writings at that Solicitor General's hearing.
Senator Tunney went into it in some detail. In effect, you admitted the writings and had some of those views
then, but said that would not bother you. You were a lawyer, and
it would not keep you from representing the Government's position
even if you had personal contrary views to a position that you
might be called upon to take as a Solicitor General. Then you came up for hearings in the Judiciary Committee
again in 1982. I believe the Solicitor General was about 1973. In
1982 you had a hearing pertaining to the District Court of Appeals,
the position that you are on. You were questioned about some of
the writings, some of those in detail. But you were not really opposed. The civil rights groups, the others did not make a battle
against you. Now, this causes me concern of why they did not make a battle
then and are making a battle now. There is some sort of concept of
statute of limitations, laches, other things of this sort that I think
a person has to bear in mind on this. Some people feel that the
issue of abortion is so dominant in this that it has influenced other
people who really are not associated particularly in that one specific field. Now, I suppose this is an area that deserves consideration, just
like every other area. You are very complex, as I pointed out, in
previous questions as to what you will do. Frankly, I do not know. I
said I ought to be a psychiatrist, and I really think that I would
have to be more than a psychiatrist to try to look at your background and make some predictability. But do you want to respond to this? I think this is a legitimate
area. Basically, of all of these things, your previous hearings—well,
I suppose it is on the concept of sort of like a statute of limitations.
Do you want to respond to that?
Judge BORK. Senator, do you mean why are people opposing me
now that did not before?
Senator HEFLIN. Well, should I pay attention to the fact that
they did not do it before? I suppose that is what the question is.
Judge BORK. Well, yes.
Senator HEFLIN. Because I intend to ask the people, the wit­nesses that come. Judge BORK. Yes, it is a little curious, as you say. They did not
oppose me before, and since I have been on the court, my record
has not been one they can object to. We have been over this in the
area of minorities and women. In eight cases involving substantive
issues, I have voted for the claim of the minority or the woman
seven times out of eight. In labor cases, I have a lot of votes for
labor unions and employees. So nothing that has happened in the
past 5x/2 years seems to me to provide any basis for opposition now.
I would think it was quite the other way around. They should have
been more exercised on the basis of some theoretical things I had
said before becoming a judge than they are on the things I have
done as a judge, than they should be on the things I have done as a judge.
Senator HEFLIN. Well, of course, somewhat of an argument has been made to me, as I asked this of certain people who are very
strongly against you. Primarily, what they are saying is this would
indicate that you will not protect the rights of minorities. They say,
well, the District Court of Appeals at the time was not nearly as
divided as it is now, and that the U.S. Supreme Court is one where
if you were to follow the agenda that they fear you follow, that you
could do terrible harm to the rights of minorities, to racial progress that has occurred.
That is their argument. Now, do you have any response to that?
Judge BORK. Well, aside from the fact that that argument assumes something about me that is not true, it also assumes that
there are four other Justices who have equally sinister views—
which is not true. It overlooks my record in this field as a judge, and it overlooks what I have said.
Now, you know, one thing, this is a hearing which you gentle­men refer to a historic, you refer to it as one of the most complete
and so forth. I have expressed my views here, and those views are
now widely known, more widely known than any views of mine before have ever been.
It really would be preposterous for me to sit here and say the things I have said to you and then get confirmed and get on the
Supreme Court and do the opposite. I would be disgraced in histo­ry. Aside from everything else, I am not going to do that.
But believe that or not, the fact is my record as a judge does not justify the opposition of these groups.
Senator HEFLIN. Well, you know, I have looked back on a lot of
decisions, but this poll tax, this Virginia thing, gives me concern.
You basically, as I understand it, say that it was not discriminatory-
Judge BORK. There was no allegation of discrimination in that case.
Senator HEFLIN. There was no allegation? Is that the distinction you made? Because there is no question to me that a poll tax that required three years of history of payment, that the last payment had to be 6 months in advance, and you had to go to the court­house to pay it was designed to prevent the poor and blacks from voting. I do not think there is any question that that is it.
Judge BORK. Senator, 1 did not discuss the case in these terms, and the Supreme Court did not discuss the case as one in which a poll tax that was designed to keep blacks from voting. Had they discussed it in those terms so that it was shown to be a discrimina­tory poll tax, it certainly should have been struck down. I have no objection to that; not only no objection to it, I affirmatively agree with that. I always have.
Senator HEFLIN. I have found some writings that you have made that would indicate that you took strong positions at times which would have meant that you believed in equal treatment of blacks, and came at a time when the heat was almost as much as the heat is now on the issue of abortion. That is the busing issue. I found in the testimony that you testified before a House Committee on the equal education opportunities in 1972—and I think that was pretty well the height of the busing fire that was raging in the country— that you testified at that time,
I would be clear about this. Congress certainly may not identify all remedies for segregation. I do not think Congress could even completely ban busing as a single remedy. As the court noted in the strong opinion involving the North Carolina busing statutes, there are cases in which busing is essential to the vindication of a constitutional right. I would think it highly doubtful that Congress would ban busing and have that statute stand up in court.
This would indicate not only your stand on busing, but it would indicate that the Supreme Court has the constitutional right to structure remedies, and you do not feel that Congress can take away from the court the availability of judicial remedies in carry­ing out the decisions.
Now, do you want to comment on that particular one?
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, yes. I have never opposed busing. The only thing I ever opposed was busing that went far beyond the original violation of law. It was much beyond what was necessary to cure the violation of law. That is a standard principle, as we both know, of equitable remedies. The remedy is as broad as the violation.
Now, I filed a brief like in the Austin, Texas, case which was re­manded, so the Supreme Court did not decide the issue. But later, in the Carter administration, in the Dayton busing case—Dayton I, I think it was—the Carter administration filed a brief signed by Griffin Bell and by Drew Days, the Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights, which took the identical position I had taken on this subject; and the Supreme Court accepted it eight to nothing, the principle that you do not create a remedy much broader than needed to cure the effects of the violation.
The position I have taken on that is now the law of the land.
The CHAIRMAN. Senator, make this your last question, okay?
Senator HEFLIN. Well, I will just stop with that.
The CHAIRMAN. NO, go ahead.
Senator HEFLIN. That is all right. I would get into another one which would probably take a longer time.
The CHAIRMAN. Judge, one point of clarification I would like to have—as might other members—before I yield to the Senator from New Hampshire. That is the constant comparison by your propo­nents and opponents of your record on the circuit court and what it might or might not be in the Supreme Court. As an originalist, what is your view of the limitations that a circuit court judge has relevant to Supreme Court precedent? Could you have overruled, at any point as a circuit court judge, any standing constitutional prin­ciple enunciated by the Supreme Court?
Judge BORK. Of course not. I could not overrule it, Mr. Chair­man, but I am certainly free in many cases to—you know, these cases, as has been pointed out here, are not all the same. They come down with different gradations. In a number of those cases, I could have gone the other way and written an opinion that—
The CHAIRMAN. I am not suggesting you could. Could you as a Supreme Court Justice disregard precedent if you so chose?
Judge BORK. NO, not if I so chose. In a number of speeches you have, I have said repeatedly that there are many precedents—these are speeches I made before I came here—that are simply too much part of the fabric of the nation.
The CHAIRMAN. NO, that is not the point. We will get into that later. I do not want to take too much time. As I understand the law as a lawyer, a Supreme Court Justice is not bound as a matter of constitutional law to accept the precedent that has gone before if he or she has another reason or rationale to disregard it. I am not saying you do. I just want to establish the principle.
Judge BORK. That is entirely true. Every Justice I have ever heard of and every legal scholar I have ever heard of says that the Supreme Court may overrule prior cases. But they all place limita­tions on that.
The CHAIRMAN. But a circuit court judge may not overrule con­stitutional principles stated by the Supreme Court. Is that not also correct?
Judge BORK. That is also correct. It depends on the application on the principle.
The CHAIRMAN. I understand.
Judge BORK. There is often a lot of leeway in there.
The CHAIRMAN. I just want to make sure, because I think we are confusing—not you, we—are confusing people, and I want to make sure I understand that a circuit court judge cannot under the law overrule an established principle that has been laid out by the Su­preme Court in the past. It cannot reject that principle. But a Su­preme Court Justice could if he so chooses. I am not saying what you might choose to do. I just want to make sure we understand.
Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from New Hampshire. I thank him for his indulgence.
Senator HUMPHREY. YOU are quite welcome since you indulged me. I apologize for my tardiness. I had the pleasure of escorting some of our counterparts from Pakistan—that is, democratically elected representatives of their Parliament—on to the floor of the Senate this morning.
It is always nice to examine a bright spot in the world, is it not? There is a nation that has risen from martial law and in which de­mocracy and the rule of law, the law made by legislators, not by generals or judges, is on the ascendance.
Well, Judge, this is day four and the game is in the fourth quar­ter, and I think you are doing very well, indeed. The nuance is coming out, the nuance of Judge Bork the judge and Judge Bork
the person. I was impressed by one of those nuances which came out. I have forgotten which Senator on the Democratic end brought it up, but it was about the fact that you as a very young lawyer, a junior member of your firm, confronted some crusty old curmudg­eons with 30 or 40 years' service to that firm, senior partners, and said, look, this Jewish quota business is dumb. I am putting words in your mouth. You were probably a little more diplomatic as a very junior member, but you confronted the establishment on behalf of a man you did not even known, you barely knew, but whose credentials, I guess, impressed you. That vignette is impres­sive to me.
Here is another one, published yesterday in an op-ed piece by a man named Stewart A. Smith, who practices law in New York City. I do not know Stewart Smith from Adam, any more than I knew you from Adam until you walked into this room the other day. It is entitled, "Bork Deserves to be a Justice."
Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent that this piece be printed in the record.
Senator KENNEDY. Without objection.
Senator HUMPHREY. Thank you.
Senator HUMPHREY. Thank you. Let me just read a few passages from this by Stewart Smith.
I served as tax assistant under three different Solicitors General during both Democratic and Republican administrations, including Judge Bork's tenure from 1973 to 1977, and I can attest on the basis of personal observation that his conduct as the Government's chief lawyer before the Supreme Court was marked by intellec­tual honestly, integrity and a professionalism much appreciated by the court itself.
Then skipping on to the last three or four paragraphs,
A second episode illustrates in another way his professionalism and integrity. A black man had been convicted in a southern State of various drug and criminal income tax charges. In his petition for Supreme Court review, the defendant claimed that the Government's principal witness had committed perjury. As the lawyer responsible for presenting the Government's tax cases to the Supreme Court, I directed that an independent evaluation be made and concluded that the defend­ant's claim was factually correct.
Accordingly, I recommended to Mr. Bork that the Government confess error and ask the Supreme Court to return the case to the court of appeals to consider wheth­er the conviction should be reversed.
So here is the situation. The spring is all wound up. The Govern­ment is already to go in the case before the Supreme Court, and here comes this little junior attorney to Robert Bork who said,
Wait a minute. The defendant is right. The defendant is right. We had better pull in our horns as embarrassing as it may be.
Continuing,
The Solicitor General Bork unhesitantly agreed with my recommendation. He took this principled action despite the strong protests of the local U.S. attorney. As Mr. Bork saw the matter, the Government's criminal prosecutions had to be con­ducted with the utmost fairness, and the Government owed a special obligation to the Supreme Court to admit when the process had been defective, whatever the cost might be. A lesser man would have yielded to institutional pressures and deprived a black man—
It does not matter what his color was, but that is what Smith says—
Deprived a black man of his rights in order to protect the reputation of another federal officer. It is fortunate when a person of Judge Bork's demonstrated ability comes to national prominence.
Indeed. My remark.
It is even more fortunate when a person of Judge Bork's professionalism does, a professionalism that guides him always when dealing with the powerful and the powerless to act with utmost honesty and responsibility. Judge Bork would enhance, indeed grace, the important work of our nation's highest tribunal.
Well, I can tell you, you certainly graced the confines of this marble inquisitorial hall these last 4 days, Judge.
Judge BORK. Thank you.
Senator HUMPHREY. SO I have come to admire you and respect you, as I expected, but I have also come to be very fond of you as a human being. You have stood the attacks well. You have been under fire. Some very stinky stink bombs have been dropped on your head these last 2 months, including some in this room, I regret to say.
Here we are in the fourth day, and perhaps it is worth a brief
recapitulation of where we are.
It is interesting to me and I am sure it is interesting to you, that
your antagonists, your opponents insist upon focusing almost exclusively on your writings as a college professor. They say that the cases you have decided, your record on the second-most important court in the country over the last 5 years is irrelevant. We have demolished that charge because, in fact, circuit court judges do have a lot of leeway in the sense that cases do not come before you in neat little packages that fit into neat little Supreme Court prece­dent pigeonholes. There is a lot of latitude.
In any event, you said that you would have decided all of those cases the same way—I am speaking of the seven of eight civil rights cases in which you upheld the claim of a minority or a woman plaintiff or person—that you would have decided all of those cases the same way had you been on the Supreme Court. Nonetheless, the point I am trying to make is this, that the oppo­nents insist upon focusing on your record, almost exclusively, your record as a college professor and your writings, while suggesting that your record as a judge is irrelevant, that your record as Solici­tor General is irrelevant, with the exception of Watergate, of course. It is all irrelevant except for the Cox episode. That is rele­vant. That is an interesting selectivity, isn't it?
Well, we have established that, contrary to the remarks about no room at the inn and no place in the Constitution and all that balo­ney, that you stood for minority and women parties in the seven of the eight cases that came before you in your capacity on the D.C. Circuit Court where substantive civil rights issues that were at con­test.
I want to focus further, and this will duplicate, I think, overlap somewhat the fine efforts of Senator Hatch yesterday, looking at some of these amicus briefs that you filed. After all, the charges against you, the false charges, have been repeated over and over so it does not hurt to overlap a little bit in your defense.
Now, what about this parallel charge that your record as Solici­tor General does not matter because you were working for a client and, implied in that, is that you just followed orders? Is that so?
Judge BORK. Well, there is latitude, but in addition to that, I think, Senator, it should be pointed out that insofar as I respected my function as Solicitor General and lived within the limits of that function, that is the way I have always tried to approach any job. People ought to be reassured by the fact that I lived up to my view of the function of that job and did not do something else. Solicitors General can, if they wish, impose their policy views on other people in the Government and some have done that.
Senator HUMPHREY. In an case, in the matter of filing amicus briefs, that is a matter of complete latitude to the Solicitor Gener­al, is it not?
Judge BORK. I would not say complete but you certainly have much more
Senator HUMPHREY. The most.
Judge BORK. Much more latitude there than you do when you are defending the Government as a client.
Senator HUMPHREY. I want to go through some of these cases in which you filed an amicus brief and if in any of those cases you did so because someone twisted your arm or you were under fire or in any way under compulsion, please tell me because I will dismiss the case. I have been hanging around these lawyers too much you
see, I am beginning to talk like them. I will throw out that exam­ple.
By the way, I could never be a lawyer or a judge because I cannot stand paperwork and I have a hell of a time keeping all this straight.
Judge BORK. Well, if that is the criterion, Senator, I am in trou­ble too, because I cannot find anything here either.
Senator HUMPHREY. All right. General Electric v. Gilbert was a 1976 case in which you filed an amicus brief—I should have a little beep here for the sake of lay people like me. An amicus brief is a so-called friend of the court brief. This is for the TV audience obvi­ously.
Judge BORK. It is where the party filing the brief is not a party to the case, but wants to file a brief to make views known. Senator HUMPHREY. Yes. It is a gratuitous effort, in a sense. Not
required. Judge BORK. NO. Senator HUMPHREY. The person filing the amicus brief is in no
way a party on either side of the case.
In General Electric v. Gilbert, that was a 1976 case, you filed a brief arguing that the exclusion of pregnancy-related benefits from an employer's disability plan violated the sex discrimination provi­sions of title VII of the Civil Rights Act. The side on which you filed an amicus brief lost, did they not? Do you want to tell us? Do you remember the details of this case?
Judge BORK. All I remember is I have a note here that six jus­tices rejected my argument. It was an argument that I did not have to file because it was a controversial position.
Senator HUMPHREY. In other words, you were advocating a broader interpretation of title VII of the Civil Rights Act than the Supreme Court was willing to embrace?
Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HUMPHREY. With respect to pregnancy benefits in sex
discrimination law, is that right? Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HUMPHREY. In other words, you were standing with an
individual. This was an individual person, right?
Judge BORK. I was. I should not take too much credit for this. The Civil Rights Division wanted me to do this and I went along because I thought it was a good argument.
Senator HUMPHREY. YOU were under no compulsion? Judge BORK. Oh, no. I was under no compulsion. Senator HUMPHREY. YOU thought it was the right thing to do? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HUMPHREY. And this was only an amicus brief but, nonetheless, you took the position that a broader application of title VII of the Civil Rights Act was in order in this case and the Supreme Court said, to the other parties and, indirectly to Bork, you are wrong.
Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HUMPHREY. You're trying to apply the law too broadly. It is interesting to note that Justice Powell, the man whom you
will replace if confirmed, voted to reject your expansive interpreta­tion. It is interesting to note also that Justice White, President
Kennedy's nominee to the Supreme Court, also rejected the expan­sive interpretation which you argued in your brief. Nobody ques­tions the commitment of Justices Powell and White or President Kennedy to equality before the law for all of our citizens.
Let's talk about another 1976 case, Runyon v. McCrary. You filed an amicus brief arguing that Section 1981 of the Post-Civil War Civil Rights Act could be applied to private schools which excluded qualified children because they were black. Do you recall any perti­nent details of that?
Judge BORK. No, Senator. I remember that I filed the brief but I do not recall any more details of the matter.
Senator HUMPHREY. Well, the short of it is that your views pre­vailed; that is, the side on whose behalf you filed the amicus brief prevailed and the Supreme Court announced, for the first time, that Section 1981 did, in fact, apply—first time in who knows how many decades
Judge BORK. Ever, I think.
Senator HUMPHREY. Beg your pardon?
Judge BORK. The first time ever.
Senator HUMPHREY. Ever, yes, since the law was passed, which was sometime after the Civil War apparently. Before I got here. For the first time that Section 1981 is a very important remedy in the area of race discrimination and that was, obviously, a signifi­cant achievement for civil rights.
Judge BORK. I think it is probably worth noting that that posi­tion, which the Court accepted, would also bar the racially-restric­tive covenant that was involved in Shelley v. Kraemer.
Senator HUMPHREY. Again, Justice White, President Kennedy's nominee, voted against the decision in the Runyon case. He was on the losing side and again, point out that there is no grounds for accusing him of racism or the President who appointed him. The next case was Lau v. Nichols, a 1974 case, in which a Chinese youngster argued that a public school receiving financial assist­ance, federal financial assistance apparently, violated title VI of the Civil Rights Act by failing to establish a program to assist non-English speaking students, such as Chinese and Hispanic, to cope with the English curriculum.
You filed a brief on behalf of this young Chinese student, argu­ing that the schools' failure to help minorities with their language problems in the schools, violated title VI. Do you want to add any details to that?
Judge BORK. NO, I just recall being told that they had these class­es of Chinese children in the school system who were not being as­sisted to learn English and they were sitting there and the curricu­lum was going right by them. They did not understand what was being said in the classroom.
Senator HUMPHREY. What is especially interesting about this case is that, in a sense, you were sticking out your neck because this Chinese boy's claim had been rejected by two lower courts that had previously heard the case and so you went, in your amicus brief, beyond the subtle law, at least to the extent that the lower courts had settled it. Is that not right?
Judge BORK. That is correct.
Senator HUMPHREY. Nobody put a gun to your head in any of these cases? Nobody said they would call you a racist or a sexist or
an ethnicist if you did not do these things? Judge BORK. No. The Solicitor General is fairly independent.
Very rarely does anybody above him, such as the Attorney General, get involved in a case. Occasionally, but very rarely. Senator HUMPHREY. Other cases, Albemarle Paper Company v. Moody, 1975. In that case, the court established the important
point that certain verbal intelligence tests, which were not validly
job-related, could be barred as discriminatory against blacks. Do
you remember the details of that case? Judge BORK. NO, I really do not, Senator. I remember there was
such a case but I do not remember any details about it. Senator HUMPHREY. AS a matter of fact, in that case, Justice Blackmun and Chief Justice Burger concurred with most of the
ruling, but felt that the decision went too far in setting very strict
standards than an employer had to meet in validating employment
screening tests. In other words, Justices Burger and Blackmun did
not want to go as far as you argued in your amicus brief. I have
not heard anybody call or allege racism on the part of Blackmun
and Burger. Another important case where you submitted an amicus was
Franks v. Bowman Transportation, 1976. In that case, in your brief,
you sided with black class action plaintiffs, seeking to establish
that minority victims of employment discrimination could be
awarded retroactive seniority relief. That was 11 years ago and I
should not keep asking you if you remember the details. I am putting you in a bad light so do not ask me any questions
like that. I do not want to be put in that light myself, even with
respect to legislation of last year, because as soon as you dispose of
one pressing issue, two more fall on your head around here and it
all becomes a blur after just a few months, not to mention years. To get back to Franks v. Bowman, a class action suit on behalf of
black citizens, Justice Powell, while concurring a part of the majority opinion, dissented against the Court's very broad interpretation
of retroactive seniority rights, as did Chief Justice Burger and Justice Rehnquist. Nobody has questioned their commitment to civil
rights laws. Let's look at one more here—this is not an amicus case, but tells
the same story, the case United Jewish Organizations v. Carey—
Governor Carey of New York. Judge BORK. I argued that one personally. I not only filed a brief, I argued it in the Court. Senator HUMPHREY. Yes, you argued it. The United States, obvi­ously, was a party to the case. Oh, I beg your pardon. That is
wrong.Judge BORK. NO, I think we were involved because it was a
voting rights case, I think. Senator HUMPHREY. Yes. Judge BORK. And constitutional issues got into it. Senator HUMPHREY. I see. So, in any event, you argued the case.
You would not have argued the case if the U.S. were not a party,
would you?
Judge BORK. I have argued a case as amicus. I argued the death penalty cases as amicus.
Senator HUMPHREY. But, either in the case of an amicus or in the case where the United States is a party, those are the only
Judge BORK. Yes, that is correct.
Senator HUMPHREY. In any event, United Jewish Organizations
v. Governor Carey, which, as you said, you personally argued before the Supreme Court and you defended a New York State re-appor­tionment plan designed to assure effective black voting, by creating districts with 65 percent non-white majorities. You also argued that such government action, involving a remedial race-conscious remedy was not, per se, unlawful, under the 14th or the 15th amendment. It goes without saying that many conservatives might take strong issue with the scope of that remedy in that case.
Judge BORK. I think they did. Senator HUMPHREY. Can you tell us why you decided to take that case on?
Judge BORK. AS a matter of fact, it was purely a legal decision. I thought that was the law and the way the law was intended to go and I did not think that the 14th and 15th amendments, in this kind of a case, prevented a race-conscious remedy in favor of blacks. So, I argued it.
I should say, Senator, when I had an objection to a case I had to take on, but I had to defend it for the Government, I would not argue it personally. I would sign the brief, but I would send some­body else over to do the arguing.
Senator HUMPHREY. In any event, that case was successful, was it not?
Judge BORK. Oh, yes, we won. Chief Justice Burger dissented from the opinion. He did not agree with you. Well, the point is, of course it is silly to ask if all of these other Justices are racists, or bigots, or narrow-minded. The point is that these cases are com­plex, and honest men and women of integrity can sometimes differ, honestly, on very fine points of law.
I think that is a point that we sometimes overlook a little bit, that reasonable men and women can differ, and that these issues that we have been discussing are complex, and if they were not dif­ficult they would not be issues, and there would not be arguments about them, and there would not be cases to decide.
Senator HUMPHREY. Let's turn to criminal law. We have not done much in that area, in the sense of criminal law as it relates to individual citizens.
The President's Working Group on the Family said, in its report on the family last year, "Crime is the crudest tax of all on the American family, a regressive levy that burdens those least able to bear its exactions." How very true.
And I say this is an issue of importance to individual citizens be­cause the statistics show that nearly every one of us, at sometime in our life, will be a victim of crime, and that is if we are lucky, because lots of people are multiple victims of crime.
That is, they are victims of criminals on multiple occasions, whether it is the breaking and entry of an automobile, or a home, or assault, or fraud, or murder. It is very, very common, and it is a very real threat to every American. I will give you a case.
86-974 0-89-17
Just a few doors down from where I live here in the District—I
should not say live here. I sleep here. I live in New Hampshire. But
anyhow, a few doors down from where I sleep after I totter on
home from this institution, there is a lady who is living in the
home her father built, many years ago, obviously. She is a lady, a woman who works outside the home. She is a
single person. And her home has been broken into, not once, not
twice, three times, to the point where she had to literally put steel
bars on her windows. The home her father built, in which she has
lived her entire life. She lives behind bars in her own home. And in some of those robberies, she has lost things of very great
personal value, not monetary value, necessarily, I do not know, but
things that—you know—heirlooms, family items. And so that is not an isolated case. We have got lots of elderly
people living behind chained doors in fear of their safety. We have
got parents all over this country who worry about their kids on the
way home, or on the way to school. Ordinary citizens, able-bodied citizens worry about walking down
a dark street at night. So this issue of crime is a very real and
practical concern to our citizens. Now I want to ask you: we have heard a lot about the rights of
criminals here so far, and that is not an unimportant thing, because we are only as secure as the least secure member of our society in our rights. But let's talk about the rights of law-abiding citizens. What responsibility do judges have to protect society and individual citizens
from criminals? Judge BORK. Well, judges can do a limited amount, of course, but I think a judge has two responsibilities. One is to ensure that any
accused gets a fair, completely fair trial, so that he is not prejudiced in any way. But the other responsibility is not to elaborate legal doctrine so
that the appeal becomes a game, and somebody gets off on a technicality, which has nothing to do with fairness. That is a very broad statement and I am not an expert on criminal law, but I have participated in reversals of convictions and of
reversals of sentencing because the trial had a serious error in it
which meant we could not be sure it was fair, or because the
double jeopardy clause was violated. On the other hand, I do not go looking for a new wrinkle that
has nothing to do with the basic fairness. Senator HUMPHREY. YOU say that the—well, how do we phrase this? Do you think that criminals are adequately protected by the
law and the Constitution, and the complex rules that have been, in
some cases, invented by judges, and which have become a part of
the fabric of our system? Do you think that has gone about far
enough, or are you proposing that it should go further? Judge BORK. Senator, I have participated in some criminal cases as a judge, and I have argued some as Solicitor General, but I am
by no means an expert on the entire field of criminal law, and I
would not want to make a cosmic judgment about the overall state
of criminal law and procedure as it now stands. I am just not competent to make that judgment.
Senator HUMPHREY. The majority of cases which come before the Supreme Court are criminal law cases, are they not?
Judge BORK. I do not think so, Senator. At least that was not my impression when I was spending time arguing up there. There are very significant criminal law cases that come up, but there are all kinds of cases that come up there.
Senator HUMPHREY. I will give you an example of an outrageous disposition of a suit—well, an outrageous disposition of a criminal case. It is the 1984 case of Nicks v. Williams. It came out of Iowa.
A 10-year-old little girl disappeared on Christmas Eve. It turned out she had been brutally murdered by a man named Robert Wil­liams.
Williams voluntarily surrendered to the police. He was read his rights. He did not confess, and, on the advice of counsel, he re­mained silent.
While he was in the custody of the police, one of the officers de­scribed how difficult it would be to find the little girl's body. See, he had already confessed, but they had not found the body nor had he revealed its location.
How difficult it would be because snow was falling, and how dis­tressed the parents would be, on top of their loss, if the child's body could not even be given a decent burial.
The officer did not question Williams, just pricked his conscience a little bit, and Williams later, subsequently volunteered the loca­tion. The body was found and evidence was used to convict Wil­liams of the murder.
And the court found that in any event, the body would have been found even without Williams' cooperation. He was convicted. The court of appeals reversed the conviction on the theory that the State had to prove that the officer had not acted in bad faith in appealing to Williams' conscience.
Williams had not been interrogated, had not been coerced in any way, he had been read his rights, but that was not good enough for these judges, or, a majority of them anyway.
My time is just about up.
The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead and finish.
Senator HUMPHREY. I am not asking you to re-hear the case, or to reach a verdict on this, but how far should judges go in protect­ing criminals at the expense of society? I am coming back to my original question, you did not answer it, and I do not know that you would be able to now. But I hope that you can give us some indication of where you are because I think, rightly, the American people have just about had it with all of these new inventions to protect criminals.
Judge BORK. Well, that is a very sensitive subject for me to speak to here, Senator, and therefore, I think I have to confine myself to the remark that a judge has to make sure that the accused person gets an entirely fair trial.
But beyond that, I do not think the scale should be weighted on the side, unfairly weighted on the side of a criminal. But I cannot say any more than that, and that is a very general statement, and I realize it is unsatisfactory.
And now that I am speaking off the cuff about a matter about which I really am not expert in any way, I probably should not
have said that much because I am not sure I said it as well as I
should have. Senator HUMPHREY. Have you done any writing? I hate to bring up the issue of articles, but have you written anything on this? Judge BORK. I have written nothing about criminal law, Senator.
It has just never been one of my specialties. Senator HUMPHREY. Thank you. My time is up. Thank you very much. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. Judge, we will now take a break for 10 minutes, until 25 after, and then we will begin questioning again. Or would you like a longer break? Judge BORK. NO, no. That is fine. The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will recess for 10 minutes. The CHAIRMAN. Judge Bork, let me discuss how—assuming the
ranking member agrees—how we will finish out the morning and
then move into the afternoon. We are now finished with the last round of questioning, and we
will begin again. Some members have questions, not all will, and
some have questions that will not last a full 30 minutes. So what I am going to do is to withhold asking my questions at
this point.Senator Metzenbaum is next in line. He tells me he has some
questions, maybe not many, and then I will yield to Senator Thurmond who would be next, alternating again. Well, actually, I guess I should yield, since this is the next round,
I will yield to Senator Thurmond for his questions, for about 10 or
15 minutes, and then yield to Senator Metzenbaum, who is in
about the same situation. Then we will break for lunch, and then we will come back and
complete the next round of questioning. So I will yield to Senator Thurmond for his round, and then to
Senator Metzenbaum. Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, I am sure this is getting old by now, but I would like
to ask you one more time to tell the committee how you differentiate between your writings which may be critical of a number of Supreme Court decisions, and what your approach is to the law in
your capacity as a judge. Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I think it is important to have that straight, because I think if one begins to identify a professor's writings with what he, or she will do as a judge, I am afraid there are
going to be a lot of young professors watching these hearings, who
will decide that being non-controversial is the best approach to a
career. But as a matter of fact, a professor is absolutely free to speculate, to think, to try out arguments. As my good friend Alex Bickel
used to say, all writing is an experiment, and that is what it is.
You start a debate, and then some of your stuff stands up, some of
it does not.
As a judge, you are responsible to the law, and not to some speculative theory you once developed. You are responsible for continuity, you are responsible for justice, you are responsible to be compassionate to individuals, none of which necessarily appears in a professor's writing.
As I have said before in these hearings, and I have said in pri­vate to one Senator—Senator Specter—in the classroom nobody gets hurt. In a courtroom, somebody always does. And that is a wholly different function than being a professor.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, you have criticized certain Su­preme Court decisions in the area of first amendment rights and the equal protection clause, as well as others.
You have also indicated that some of these decisions are accepted law, and should not be disturbed by the Supreme Court. This has been taken by some as a change in your views, in order to enhance the probability of your confirmation. I do not believe this is the case. However, would you comment on this criticism.
Judge BORK. From the beginning of these hearings, Senator, I have said that I think the ultimate touchstone for a judge is the intention of the lawmaker, and in constitutional law—in fact it is not the intention, it is the original understanding of what that pro­vision meant.
And in constitutional law that means what the ratifiers under­stood when they ratified the Constitution. But I have also said that the law has developed, and the nation has developed, and decisions have been made around which too much has been built, and around which too many expectations have clustered, for them to be overruled.
Now I might disagree with a lot of decisions, over time, although as I have said, the large majority of Supreme Court decisions I agree with. But I have given examples here, you know, of cases that just are not to be overruled. I am trying to remember the ex­amples.
I have given examples in my speeches. The commerce clause cases cannot be overruled. You cannot cut the commerce clause back.
The legal tender cases authorizing paper money cannot be over­ruled, no matter what the original understanding was. The equal protection clause cases cannot be overruled. I mean, the extension of the equal protection clause cannot be overruled.
I have mentioned some first amendment cases that cannot be overruled. I have mentioned a lot of cases that I think are now part of our law, and whatever theoretical challenges might be lev­elled at them, it is simply too late for any judge to try to tear it up, too late for a judge to overrule them.
Incorporation doctrine I mentioned this morning in connection with Senator Heflin's questions, is also something that is now thor­oughly established. I do not know that incorporation is contrary to original understanding, because the evidence goes both ways, but if it is, nonetheless, that doctrine is established.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, I happen to agree with your philosophy of judicial restraint. However, I think it would be help­ful to the committee, and informative for the American people, if you will explain the dangers that occur to our form of government when judicial activism occurs.
Judge BORK. Well, if a judge begins to do things, begins to decide
things without a warrant in the constitutional text, and its history
and its structure, in the line of precedent that has been built up—
if he begins to do things, strike down laws, that he has no constitutional warrant, in the sense that I have described, then he en­croaches upon democratic processes.
He encroaches upon the proper domain of the legislature. And one of the freedoms of our people is to vote for representatives who
will make policy, and a judge should stop that policymaking when it is contrary to the Constitution.
He should allow it when the Constitution allows it. This is basi­cally a democratic country, and a judge should not make it less so,
without a warrant in the Constitution.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, a great deal of concern has been expressed over your book, "The Antitrust Paradox," which you wrote in 1978.
I think it is interesting to note that, as you stated yesterday, when you wrote this book 9 years ago, you were an amateur economist. The book was premised on the question of what best services
the consumer, and as you readily admit, some of the arguments you put forth then might be wrong today.
You did not think so at the time, but as economics advance, ideas change. Isn't that correct, Judge Bork? Judge BORK. That is entirely correct. A desire that judges adopt
the Sherman Act to evolving economic understanding appears in
the legislative history of the Sherman Act, and also appears in the
rule of reason, which is the basic rule of the Sherman Act, laid
down by Chief Justice White in 1911 in the great cases involving Standard Oil and American Tobacco.
Senator THURMOND. Judge Bork, I would like, however, to clarify some of the concerns raised as a result of your book. For example, you state that the goal of antitrust is consumer
welfare. Some have indicated that you seem to be against lower prices, say, at discount stores.
How can you be for consumers if you do not like discount stores?
Judge BORK. Senator, I spend a lot of my time looking for dis­count stores. I do like discount stores. Typically, in a market, there will be consumers who respond to lower prices, other consumers will respond to the provision of service or information.
One manufacturer might decide to fix the prices of his retailers on his products alone, in order to encourage those retailers to provide service and information, compete through service and information. Another manufacturer will go for the segment of the market
which is responsive to price, and will not fix the prices of his retailers, and in that way, consumers get a choice between a low price or between the provision of service and information.
Sometimes, the same manufacturer will do both. He will have one brand that is price-maintained and one brand that is not, so he can hit both segments of the market.
I certainly would not advocate anything that would result in
wiping out discount stores, they are a very valuable institution,
and I personally look for them.
Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Judge. Thank you, Mr. Chair­man. I will reserve any other questions for later.
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Metzenbaum.
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, in this hearing we have already talked about your views on one sterilization case. There is another one I want to discuss with you, the American Cyanamid case that you decided in 1984.
The Occupational Safety and Health Act, a statute that Congress passed to protect the workers of this country says that, quote: "Each employer shall furnish to each of his employees a place of employment free from recognized hazards that are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to his employees." End of quote.
American Cyanamid operated a department which exposed women to lead, a substance which causes harm to a developing fetus. The company offered the women of the department a horri­ble choice.
The women could quit their jobs, or, they could keep their jobs and be sterilized.
The company called this a fetus protection policy. It was really a policy of be sterilized or be fired. You wrote the opinion allowing the company to maintain this policy.
Judge Bork, there were 30 women working for the Cyanamid company when the company adopted the be-sterilized-or-fired policy. This policy forced 23 of those women to be sterilized or be fired. Five were actually sterilized before the lawsuit was filed. Cy­anamid forced over 75 percent of their women employees to choose between their jobs and the possibility of ever having children.
Judge, I must tell you that it is such a shocking decision, and I cannot understand how you as a jurist could put women to the choice of work or be sterilized, and I would think you are entitled to comment on how you arrived at that decision.
Judge BORK. I would be glad to, Senator. I am just trying to recall the case. That was a unanimous decision joined in by Judge Scalia—now Justice Scalia—and Senior District Judge Williams from California. What we did, as I recall, was affirm the decision of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. That is, OSHA, the agency which is responsible for protecting safety in the workplace had already decided this way and we affirmed it.
Now, as I wrote, it is important to understand the context in which this case arose and the task that is set for this court. Ameri­can Cyanamid found and the administrative law judge agreed that it could not reduce ambient lead levels in one of its departments sufficiently to eliminate the risk of serious harm to fetuses carried by women employees.
The company was thus confronted with unattractive alternatives. It could remove all women of child bearing age from that depart­ment—a decision that would have entailed discharging some of them and giving others reduced pay at other jobs—or the company could attempt to mitigate the severity of this outcome by offering continued employment in the department to women who were sterilized.
The company chose the latter alternative and the women in­volved were thus faced with a distressing choice. Some chose steri­lization. Some did not. The fact is, if they had not offered that choice, these women would have been put in lower paying jobs or would have been discharged. They offered a choice to the women. Some of them, I guess, did not want to have children.
My opinion is not an endorsement of a sterilization policy. As I noted, the policy might—in the opinion—the policy might be an unfair labor practice or a form of employment discrimination under title VII. Indeed, the union and the women employees had sued the employer under title VII and had reached a settlement with that employer.
The basis of the decision was Congress' intent. Since the words of the act, "recognized hazards" were somewhat ambiguous, we looked at legislative history and cases interpreting similar lan­guage in other federal laws. My opinion concluded that Congress had been concerned with physical conditions of the workplace, not with policies offering women a choice.
And my opinion was narrow. I said that the case might be differ­ent if the employer had offered the choice of sterilization in order to maintain an unlawfully high lead level, but the fact is the com­pany could not get the lead levels down and the company was charged only because it offered women a choice.
I think that is not a pro sterilization opinion. It is not an anti-woman opinion. It is simply upholding a federal agency to which we owe deference in deciding—when you review a federal agency you are supposed to defer to their judgment if it is not outside the bounds of rationality—and the union conceded in oral argument that the company could lawfully have stated that only sterile women would be employed in the department.
So this case is simply about offering women who did not want to be discharged or sent to lower paying jobs a choice. That is all it was about.
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bork, as I understand your opinion, you are saying that the Occupational Safety and Health Adminis­tration came in with that position. You know, I am sure, that the Labor Secretary said that the policy should be barred. And you cannot tell me, Judge, that any Member of Congress said or thought that a safer workplace could be achieved at the expense of forced sterilization.
Congress said, no hazards in the workplace, but you wrote an opinion which said it was okay for a company to achieve safety at the expense of women by preventing its female employees from ever having children. I have to say to you that that is a distortion of the statute beyond recognition. I think it is unfair. I think it is inhumane, and maybe it somehow explains the concerns that women of this country have and have evidenced about your ap­pointment.
Judge BORK. Senator, may I say a word?
Senator METZENBAUM. Surely.
Judge BORK. There was not a forced sterilization policy at all. The company merely said, if you wish to stay in a place that is dangerous to a fetus, if you do this we will let you stay there. The company did not achieve safety at the expense of women. They could not get the lead levels down. The administrative agency spe­cifically found—OSHA specifically found—that the company had no way of getting the levels down.
Now, if this opinion were not a fair one, I would not have gotten a unanimous panel from Judges Scalia and Williams and I would not have been able to uphold that opinion over a petition for re­hearing en bane, to have the full court. I think there were 11 mem­bers of our court at this time.
I do not know that there was a petition for rehearing or that even anybody voted for rehearing. If this were the case you de­scribed, I would not have gotten the other two judges and I certain­ly would not have been able to sustain the opinion against our full court of 11 members.
Senator METZENBAUM. Let me say to you, Judge Bork, during these several days of hearings you have routinely relied upon the fact that this judge or that judge agreed with you. You have said that certain other legal scholars agreed with you. You have not talked much about the great body of those who have disagreed with you.
You say ignore your academic writings, that you they are merely speculative. You told Senator Thurmond this morning you were trying out arguments. That is part of the process to start a debate as an academician. And you would say, look at your record on the court, it is much more reliable.
You have talked about several occasions, seven out of eight cases that you decided as the circuit court of appeals. I have asked the Justice Department to make those available to me during the recess. I do not have them. I do not know what they say. I do not know whether they are distinguishable. But I cannot tell you strongly enough that the women of this country are terribly, terri­bly apprehensive about your appointment.
I have traveled throughout Ohio. I have traveled throughout the country, and it is unbelievable to me the kinds of people that come up to me—a clerk, a woman who was from an economically strong social group, you get on an elevator, you walk past somebody in a hallway—and the women's groups, frankly, are afraid. They are afraid of you.
Yesterday you said, women and blacks who know your record on the court need not fear you. But the fact is, Judge Bork, they do fear you. They are concerned. They are frightened. They were not enthused about Sandra Day O'Connor or Rehnquist or Scalia. But they were not frightened by that appointment.
The women of America, in my opinion, have much to be worried about in connection with your appointment; the blacks as well. And it is only fair to say that you have made it quite clear in your appearance before this panel that you are not a frightening man, but you are a man with frightening views.
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, if this case
Senator METZENBAUM. May I finish?
Judge BORK. I am sorry. I thought you were.
Senator METZENBAUM. The basic problem, as I see it, is that to you the Constitution is not a living document; it is not a charter of liberty. And if you cannot find protection for the individual in the fine print, then the people of this country are out of luck.
You have stated views time again that would reverse progress for blacks, that would slam the door on women, that would allow gov­ernment in the bedroom, that would adversely affect the rights of
consumers, that would limit free speech, that would undercut the
principle of equality under the law. And before we came to these
hearings I had said publicly, and I repeat now, that I think you
had the burden of proof on your shoulders to satisfy this commit-
tee—and each of us has to speak for himself—that your views are
consistent with the Bill of Rights and previous court decisions and the Constitution of the United States.
It is with some sadness, Judge Bork, that I say I really do not think you have done that. Thank you very much.
Judge BORK. Well, thank you, Senator. Let me respond briefly to that.
In the first place, I think your discussion took off from the point of this particular case, and I must say to you that the entire Occupational Safety and Health Administration agreed with me. It was
a unanimous panel opinion and you say nobody was afraid of Justice Scalia. Justice Scalia was on this opinion. Our court did not rehear this case en bane.
That means they did not think it was an outrageous case. And it was a matter of statutory interpretation, not a matter of constitutional law, and I suppose the 5 women who chose to stay on that
job with higher pay and chose sterilization—I suppose that they
were glad to have the choice—they apparently were—that the com­pany gave them.
But let me go on to your broader charge. I cannot say this enough times. You know, beginning with Brown v. Board ofEducation I have supported black equality. And I have done that in print long before I got here.
I have never said anything or decided anything that should be frightening to women. You are undoubtedly correct, Senator, that
there are women who are apprehensive. I think it can only be because they do not know my record. I have repeatedly showed you
the cases I have decided on the court of appeals in which I have voted for women.
In addition to that, there is no reason for consumers to fear me because in so far as we are talking about the antitrust law, I am
guided entirely by my best understanding of what is good for consumers. And if I am persuaded that something else is good for con­sumers, I will go that way. There is no doubt about it.
If you now turn to the Constitution and my allegedly narrow views of that, if you will look at my first amendment decisions you
will see that in cases I have taken a broad view of the first amend­ment. If you will look at my decision that came down recently— which was assigned to me long before I was nominated and we voted that way long before I was nominated—I have taken a broad view of the double jeopardy clause in favor of a sentenced person.
If you will look at what I have stated about the equal protection clause, you will see it as a better view—I think it is a better view— than one that a lot of people take who exclude groups from equal protection.
In sum, Senator, I think there is no basis for the concern you de­scribe among women and blacks and I regret to say, I think there is no basis for the charges you have leveled at me.
Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, Judge Bork.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. We will check. Senator Hatch is next. Did he yield to you? Well, Senator Simpson, are you prepared to go? Or we can wait for Senator Hatch to come back. I would like to get one more witness in.
Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, if you could just wait a moment and see if Orrin is prepared. The CHAIRMAN. In the phone booth. Okay. He will be out in just a minute, hopefully with his cape off. 
Senator. You were out. I want to explain the laughter. They said you were in the phone booth, and I said you would be here in a minute, and hopefully with your cape off.
Senator HATCH. I heard about that crusty remark.
The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Utah. And with your permis­sion, we will recess at least for an hour. We will make a judgment whether it is an hour or an hour and a half after Senator Hatch.
Senator HATCH. I would put into the record at this point, with your approval, significant pro minority and pro women appellate court decisions by Judge Bork if I could.
The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
Senator HATCH. I have provided a copy of that for Senator Metz­enbaum, who had asked for it.
Well, Judge, it has been a long 4 days and I appreciate your pa­tience. We have heard your 1971 Indiana Law Journal article re­peatedly quoted, along with your other academic writings and speeches.
For years you were a professor. Now, let me ask you this. Are not professors paid to be provocative, to create interest by specula­tion and speculating on alternatives and innovations in the law?
Judge BORK. Yes, they are, Senator. But I must say that if profes­sors are paid to be provocative and speculative, I was underpaid for what I did. 
Senator HATCH. I agree. But I think the country has benefited a great deal because of the proliferation of your writings and your
other works. As a Judge you have said that you accept legal opin­ions. You were criticized as a professor in this particular case.
Now, as a judge you said you accept legal opinions. Some have brought out that now you are accepting some legal opinions that you have criticized.
Judge BORK. I accept them as settled law. I have not said that I agree with all of those opinions now, but they are settled law and as a judge that does it for me.
Senator HATCH. Most of the criticisms that we have found here have been because of your criticisms of opinions that you made while you were a professor; is that right?
Judge BORK. That is correct.
Senator HATCH. Or somebody in charge of professional duties such as a law firm, or even a Solicitor General. And I have not
heard too many of your approaches criticized as Solicitor General, except for the firing of Archibald Cox.
What would happen if academics had to give the same respect to precedent as do judges? Judge BORK. Well, I would think that it would dry up academic
writing. Nobody wants to sit around and write articles and say,
that is a wonderful opinion and that is another wonderful opinion.
You usually only write about doctrines that are coming into the
law which you think are wrong or questionable or at least require closer examination.
Some people go back and re-examine the rationale of Marbury v. Madison, which established judicial review in 1803. That is all
right as an academic. I do not happen to do that. I happen to think
Marbury v. Madison was correctly decided. But some people do do that.
But I cannot imagine anybody who did that, if he got on a court, saying he was going to overrule Marbury v. Madison. This just is
not done.
Senator HATCH. On the flip side, what if all the judges were as
free wheeling in these cases as academics are? Judge BORK. Well, you would have a chaotic legal system, and
you would also have, I think, a legal system that had become politicized.
Senator HATCH. Actually, I think the point that we are bringing
out here is that there is a real difference in the roles that you have
held through the years.
588
Judge BORK. There is a difference between a practitioner, which
I was. There is a difference between that and a professor, which I was. There is a difference between that and the Solicitor General, which I was. And they are all different from being a judge.
Senator HATCH. Well, we have had some here criticize you for changing positions when in fact what you have really been doing is
changing various roles in the legal practice or legal profession in
our society. Yesterday we went through a rather lengthy discussion
of how imminent a subversive speech must be before the first
amendment protects it. Now, this is a technical line-drawing exer­cise, it seems to me, in the law.
Some judges and some cases draw the line in one place and some judges and some cases draw them in another.
Judge BORK. The Supreme Court has had three different posi­tions on that issue over the years.
Senator HATCH. And academics from all sides have criticized those positions one way or the other. Judge BORK. That is correct. Senator HATCH. And it is actually the duty of the judge to draw
varying lines. In other words, to protect the constitutional value
that we are trying to protect. That is what judges do. Academics
can sit back and criticize and find fault or sustain or find support for some of these viewpoints.
Judges do follow precedent. They follow a whole line founded years before and academics are constantly seeking for new lines—
new ways of solving their conjectural approaches, new ways of
maybe re-drawing the lines in ways in which they should not have
been drawn in the first place. I think that is a fair statement. Do
you feel that the distinction between judge and academic explains
the distinctions between you as a professor and you as a judge—
explain apparent inconsistencies, but in fact, may not even be in­consistent, but are merely changes in roles?
Judge BORK. I think it does, yes. No, that is right. I have not re­visited many areas I have written about. If I did, I might well continue my philosophical criticism of those things, but that has nothing to do with the fact that they are law and, as a judge, I am not a philosopher. I am a judge.
Senator HATCH. Well, as a judge, will you continue to obey the rules of judging, regardless of your past professional views or pro­fessorial views?
Judge BORK. Of course, of course, and if I went back to being a professor, I would follow my professorial instincts, rather than
what I did as a judge.
Senator HATCH. Well, I think your 5x/2 years on the bench have
proven that to be true. In other words, based once again on the presumption that actions speak louder than words, I would like to just
compare your actions, as a judge, with some of the words of your
critics, as they have been raised over the last month or so. Have
you ever, as an appellate judge, invalidated a civil rights statute of any sort?
Judge BORK. NO, I have applied them. As Solicitor General, I never argued to invalidate one or ever cast doubt upon one.
Senator HATCH. Well, if you listen to your critics talk, you would
believe that you had struck down every civil rights law you re589
viewed. In fact, during your tenure on the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, you have, in every instance, upheld civil rights laws, including title VII, the Equal Pay Act, the Voting Rights Act, and, I
think, in a manner consistent with, or broader than, Supreme
Court decisions. Is that a fair statement? Judge BORK. It is certainly consistent with. I do not know if it is
broader than. I just do not have that judgment in my mind at the
moment. Senator HATCH. My interpretation, as I have read those, is that
they are certainly consistent with, and I believe they are broader
than, present interpretations of our present Supreme Court, which
many are very pleased with. In your years on the D.C. Circuit, you
have had dozens of opportunities to construe civil rights statutes, is
that correct? Judge BORK. Well, dozens—I do not know, Senator. I really have
not kept account. Senator HATCH. And we have brought out, in all but two of these
civil rights cases, you have sided with the minority or with female
plaintiffs on those cases. Judge BORK. All but one of those cases. There was an additional
case—which I was reminded of by Senator Humphrey, I had forgotten it—in which I ruled against an age discrimination plaintiff. Senator HATCH. But even if you accept that case, again, in both
of those cases, the Supreme Court and Justice Powell agreed with
you. Is that right? Judge BORK. AS I recall. Senator HATCH. That is my recollection, too, and they determined that the law required a ruling against the minority plaintiffs in those two cases. That is my resolution of it, as I saw it. But,
I think it is valuable maybe to deal with specifics on some of these
things. Would you sketch, for the committee, the issues in the
Sumter County v. U.S. case? This was a South Carolina voting
rights case, decided in 1983 by your circuit. Judge BORK. That was not by our circuit, Senator. That kind of
case calls for a three-judge district court. Senator HATCH. Right, this was a three-judge Judge BORK. And our practice is to put one Court of appeals'
judge and two district court judges down in the courtroom to hear
the case. Senator HATCH. Okay. Judge BORK. Sumter County had moved from a method of selecting their county council from a district voting to an at-large voting
system and the Attorney General had refused to clear that under
the Voting Rights Act. They are required to go and get clearance
from the Department of Justice. If they cannot get clearance, then
they go to court and challenge it and say they are entitled to clearance. They had basically two arguments. As I recall, one was that they
were not required to pre-clear because they had already had it once
before or something of that sort. We ruled against them on that.
That was sort of a factual legal issue. The other thing they had to
establish was that the at-large system was not adopted with the
intent or the effect of diluting black voting strength and we ruled,
on the evidence, that they had failed to prove that it did not have
86-974 0-89-21
that intent or effect and so we ruled against the Sumter County
Council and for the blacks who wanted a districting system again
instead of an at-large election system. Senator HATCH. That is right and have you had an opportunity
to study the views of Justice Powell on the Voting Rights Act? Judge BORK. No, I have not. Senator HATCH. Well, let me just go through it. Now, keep in
mind, I thought he was a great judge and justice. Judge BORK. Oh, I think there is no doubt about that. Senator HATCH. I think most people conclude that he was so this
is not by way of criticism of him, but merely to show the position
that you have. It may be of interest to the committee to realize
that Justice Powell, unlike you, Judge Bork, has continually criticized expansive interpretations of the Voting Rights Act. In fact,
Justice Powell voted against minority plaintiffs in 17 out of 25
voting rights cases that he decided. I think I have concluded, or I am beginning to conclude, that my
critical colleagues might not have confirmed Justice Powell if he
were sitting in your shoes today. But, in fact, our memory may be
hasty, but Justice Powell was opposed by some selective civil rights
groups when he came before the Senate in 1971. After all, he favored many narrower constructions of the Civil Rights laws than
you have. Judge BORK. Yes, but I think, as we both agree, Justice Powell is a great justice and I think it should be said that these are matters
about which reasonable men can differ. Senator HATCH. That is my point. Judge BORK. In interpreting those statutes. I do not want to contrast myself with Justice Powell in order to show that I am a greater defender of civil liberties. These are legal issues and reasonable
men can differ. Senator HATCH. I agree. But it is a useful experience to have you contrasted. The reason I am doing it is because the argument was
first made that we have to have balance on the Court and therefore, to lose Justice Powell and to get somebody who may be more
conservative—which I do not think is necessarily the case here—I
think it is a fallacious argument. I think these matters, if you
really look at the facts and your actions, which speak louder than
the words of some of those who have been critics of you, you find
that you stand in very good stead with regard to some of the criticisms that have been lodged against you. Let me just continue a little bit more. Could you describe the
Palmer v. Shultz case? Now, that concerned gender discrimination
in the Foreign Service.
Judge BORK. Was that the one in which we used statistical evi­dence to show discrimination?
Senator HATCH. This was the one where you granted summary judgment to the Government in a suit by a female Foreign Service
officer, alleging discriminations in promotions. It was an Equal Pay
Act case. You voted against the Government and reinstated that
particular Equal Pay Act case. Judge BORK. Just a second here, Senator, so I can refresh myself
a little bit.
Senator HATCH. It was the one where you based your decision
solely upon statistical evidence. Judge BORK. Oh, yes. That was a recent case. Senator HATCH. Yes. In fact, there was Ososky v. Wick as well.
Ososky v. Wick was a similar case where you also voted to reverse
another district court case and applied the Equal Pay Act to the
Foreign Service's merit system. In both of those cases, you found
inferences of intentional discrimination which could be based solely
on statistical evidence. Now, the reason I am pointing this out is
these are hardly cases where you could be shown to be walking in
lockstep with this administration. You ruled against the Government in both cases and you ruled
against the Government on the basis of arguments that the President himself would probably not approve. So, it is clear that you
were making no special efforts to impress President Reagan when
you made those decisions. Judge BORK. I probably was not making an effort to impress him
either, when I held that the man had a first amendment right to
put up a poster in the subway ridiculing him. He may not have
liked that. Senator HATCH. That poster has just gone up, by the way. Well, let's turn to Laffey v. Northwest Airlines. This concerned the applicability of the Equal Pay Act to airline stewardesses. In that instance, you found that female stewardesses may not be paid less
than male pursers. Judge BORK. Since the jobs were essentially equivalent. Senator HATCH. That is right. Now, the airlines were, by you,
found to have discriminated against females in that particular
case, against women. The Supreme Court refused certiorari in that
case, in essence, allowing that particular decision by you to stand.
Women out there should not be afraid of Judge Bork because your
actions speak louder than the criticisms of your critics. These are
cases of record. Judge BORK. Not only that, Senator, but I do not know where the criticism comes from because I have never spoken or written hostilely about women. Senator HATCH. That is for sure and that is what bothers me about some of the things that have been stated here. They state
these broad-brushed generalities but apparently, have not read
your cases or have not looked at what you have done or have not
seen what your actions have been. In other words, in the hysteria
of being afraid of having somebody they brand "conservative" on
the Court, it seems to me there is a wholesale misrepresentation of
what you stand for and what your actions have really been. You
have to resent that. I resent it. I think it is an abomination and yet
that is the type of rhetoric you are getting in this manner. To return to your record on the bench, we could examine case
after case which would show an inclination to uphold civil rights.
Let me take just one other case and that is the case of Emory v.
Secretary of the Navy. That involved the application of civil rights
review to the Navy's promotion decisions, if you will recall that
case. Judge BORK. I do. It was recent.
Senator HATCH. Well, you reversed a district court's opinion in that case. Why don't you tell us about it. Judge BORK. That was a black naval officer, a captain as I recall,
who had left the Navy and then he sued, claiming that while he
was in the Navy, he was denied promotion to admiral because the
promotion board was all white and he did not get—similar to a
claim that they select an all-white jury and so forth. This case was
dismissed by the district court, as I recall, because he had, by leaving the Navy, he had taken himself outside the pool from which
admirals are drawn. We reversed because he was claiming an
action in the past, when he was still in the pool, of racial discrimination. So we reversed the district court and told him to reinstate
the lawsuit. Senator HATCH. That was the appropriate thing to do. You stated that "the military has not been exempted from constitutional provisions that protect the rights of individuals. It is precisely the role
of the courts to determine whether those rights have been violated." I submit, that is hardly the language one would expect from
one who has been accused of closing the courts to civil rights claimants. It is another case that shows that you have really upheld civil
rights claimants. Your opinion, which of course, reversed judges sitting on the lower court who sincerely decided the case as best they
could. Judge BORK. Oh, sure. That was a motions panel. It would have been very easy just to affirm without opinion. Senator HATCH. Sure. But your opinion opened up, it seemed to
me, the military to judicial scrutiny. Judge BORK. Well, I do not think opened it up any more than it
properly is and has been. We disavowed any intention of trying to
litigate whether somebody should have been promoted or not,
except where he claims his promotion was denied him for unconstitutional reasons. Senator HATCH. Well, but once again it seems to me that the ac­cusations do not justify the squaring with the reality of your actions or your actual judicial record. It is interesting to note how
many of these cases, the Palmer case, the Wick case, the Emory
case, were cases in which you voted to reverse a lower court which
had ruled against civil rights plaintiffs. I find that a striking consideration. The special interest groups opposing you, purport to
review your record based only on a small fraction of the cases that
you have heard and these were the non-unanimous cases. They
only comprise about 14 percent of your total cases. Judge BORK. Yes and I do not know how many of those were civil rights cases, come to think of it. Senator HATCH. Well, that is right. Those cases that I just described were all excluded upon review because the three-judge
 
panels were unanimous, despite the fact that the lower court had
ruled the other way. Again, it shows the bigoted bias on the part of
those who did the reviews of your record. It shows how they have
tried to scuttle your nomination, I think, for very inappropriate
reasons. They have ignored what your record really is. That bothers me a lot and it has got to bother anybody who is fair in this
country. It certainly has got to bother you.
If you look at other cases, such as Norris v. D.C. where you rejected a district court's attempt to dismiss a plaintiffs complaint of
mis-treatment or Doe v. Weinberger where you ruled against the
Government and ensured that a homosexual was accorded full due
process rights. Those are important cases. They may be just everyday affairs to you, where I think you came out very, very well
against your critics. In fact, I think in all your cases, you came out
pretty doggone well against your critics. Your critics have not come out well in these hearings, nor have
they come out well given your answers, nor have they come out
well on the facts. They have distorted the facts. They have misused
statistics. They have distorted your opinions. Why are they doing
this? They cannot attack your intellect. They cannot attack you as
a good judge. They cannot attack your ethics. They cannot attack
your work effort. I guess the only way they can do it is unfairly. That is really what it comes down to and when it is attacked
that way, when you are attacked that way, that is what I call pure
and simple politics. That is really what is involved here. I think
that is what is coming out. I think your actions speak a lot louder
than their words and frankly, you have consistently voted to preserve fundamental constitutional rights. I do not think there is any
question about that. You agree with that, don't you? Judge BORK. I agree with that. Senator HATCH. Well, I think anybody would who reads the
record. Judge BORK. I think the reaction suggests that I should disagree
in order to be provocative. Senator HATCH. I am glad you can honestly agree because the
fact of the matter is, your record speaks louder than the criticisms
of your critics. I think your testimony is a powerful rebuttal. Your
record is a powerful rebuttal to those who would contend that you
are a judicial activist or that you would bend legal principles to
meet your political needs or ideology or objectives. When you had
the opportunity to do that in the busing case, you rejected it. You
did what was right. You rejected employing the Katzenbach case, which was right
there for you. It was a Supreme Court decision. You could easily
have done it and you could have gotten rid of something that conservatives have felt was wrong in America for a long time, including some liberals who feel it is wrong in America. And you could
have done it in a whole wide variety of other cases. The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me, Senator. Senator HATCH. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. DO you think you could have done that and been
constitutionally consistent with the requirement to follow precedent?
Judge BORK. Could have done which? The CHAIRMAN. That was not my question though. My question
was
Judge BORK. Oh, I see. Katzenbach v. Morgan was a precedent. I
was not a judge at this time. I am not talking about my role as a
judge.The CHAIRMAN. Oh, I thought you were talking about your own
opinion.
Judge BORK. No, I was writing something in support of a bill that would have not eliminated, but would have reduced the amount of busing and it would have been easy, in that argument, to say the bill is constitutional because Katzenbach v. Morgan says you can change the Constitution by statute. I just rejected that approach, explicitly, in the argument.
Senator HATCH. I would also like to place in the record several articles relative to the events of October 20, 1973, a news article by Milton Viorst and an extract of a book by Benvenista, an article by Evans and Novack and several other articles on that subject, if I could, Mr. Chairman?
The CHAIRMAN. HOW long is the extract of the book, though?
Could we just have that Senator HATCH. It is about 5 or 6 pages. The CHAIRMAN. Oh, fine. I thought you were going to put a
whole book in there. Following the admonitions of the ranking member. He always cautions me against spending taxpayers' money to that extent.
Senator HATCH. I may be just as concerned about taxpayers'
money as you. The CHAIRMAN. I am not suggesting you are not. Senator HATCH. But certainly not as much as the The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, they will be in the record.
Senator HATCH. Perhaps the true test of a good judge is whether
he can adhere to the law when the facts are really sensational. A
judge with less dedication to the law may sometimes be tempted to
decide a case in a way that might get local attention or national attention.
With that introduction, I would like to just examine with you one that has just recently been examined here. That is the Oil,
Chemical and Atomic Workers Union v. Cyanamid case. As you
know, that case involved the sterilization of female employees in a
plant where lead levels would endanger a fetus. Could you give us a fuller picture of the facts of that case?
Judge BORK. Well, that was a case in which there was a particu­lar department in the American Cyanamid Company where they
could not get lead levels in the air down. They had them down as
low as they could get them. At those levels, there was a threat to do serious damages to fetuses.
Now, everybody conceded that the company could have said women of child-bearing age are hereby fired. That was conceded.
Or the company could have said women are transferred to another
department. What the company did was give women a choice: You
can be transferred to another department at a lower paying job; or if you want to, surgical sterilization is available to you.
The company did not do it. They just explained that there was that option.Now, the question was simply a statutory question of whether offering the choice, the option, was a hazard in the workplace. When I was discussing this case with Senator Metzenbaum, I said that OSHA, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, said it was not a hazard. I was wrong about that. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration said it was a hazard. It was the Occu­pational Safety and Health Review Commission that reviewed OSHA's decision that rejected that and said it was not a hazard.
We affirmed OSHA on the grounds of offering a choice; no force, no coercion, just offering a choice for the women who really wanted
to keep those jobs. It was not a hazard. That was a unanimous
panel. There was no attempt that I can recall; certainly, we did not
rehear it en bane so apparently the full court did not regard it as
an outrageous decision or a troublesome decision. The Secretary of Labor did not appeal, did not try to go to the Supreme Court.
It was a sad choice these women employees had to make. It was very distressing. The only question was, should they be given a
choice? And is giving them a choice a hazard? We did not think it was under the act.
Senator HATCH. That had been reviewed by the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HATCH. Who are experts in the field.
Judge BORK. Yes, and we owed them some deference, too, in their
interpretation of the law.
Senator HATCH. Sure. Well, it does seem to me that this sterilization policy might have been sex discrimination that is actionable
under title VII.
Judge BORK. We said in the opinion it might be.
Senator HATCH. Okay.
Judge BORK. But that was not before us. Senator HATCH. I presume the reason that is so is because only
female employees had to go through this process or procedure. Judge BORK. That is right. We did not decide that case because
that was being litigated elsewhere, but we said it might be. Senator HATCH. YOU did say it in the opinion, and you did consider that issue, is what you are saying? You did not consider the
issue, but you said it in your opinion that it might be? Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HATCH. In other words, the union had already sued
under title VII, and they had settled that suit? Judge BORK. That is right.Senator HATCH. Okay. So this was the second suit based upon the
same facts? Judge BORK. Yes, but under a different statute. Senator HATCH. NOW, the principal criticism that I have heard
about your opinion in this case is that you accepted the administrative law judge's determination that it was economically infeasible
for the employer to reduce the lead levels to a degree necessary for
fetal safety. Judge BORK. Well, you are supposed to accept their decisions of fact unless there is clearly no substantial evidence for them. Senator HATCH. SO it is not unusual for a hearing judge to rely on an expert's opinion? Judge BORK. At the court of appeals level, we do not redetermine facts unless there is no substantial evidence in the record. The CHAIRMAN. Would the Senator yield for a clarification on my
part?Senator HATCH. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. Judge, so I understand the case, and maybe
others, was the plaintiff in the case the Secretary of Labor? Did the
Secretary bring the case? Judge BORK. Well, I am trying to think. No, it was the union— the Secretary of Labor did not file a brief. The CHAIRMAN. The Secretary of Labor argued the same position
the union was arguing? That is all I am trying to figure out. Judge BORK. I do not quite recall, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. DO you know, Senator Hatch? Senator HATCH. The Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers Union. The CHAIRMAN. Yes, my question is, was the Secretary of Labor
taking the same position? Judge BORK. NO, I think no. The CHAIRMAN. I am just curious. Judge BORK. I have a note here, which I agree with. In some
cases, the Secretary of Labor will bring an appeal where he agrees
with OSHA, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
and disagrees with the Commission which has reviewed OSHA. The CHAIRMAN. SO OSHA came along and said this was a hazard. The Commission that reviews OSHA said it is not a hazard. The
Court agreed with the Commission that it was not a hazard. Judge BORK. Right. The Secretary of Labor could have appealed
from the Commission decision but did not, and did not file a brief.
If the position the Commission, the panel, took was so unaccept­able, it is hard to see why the Secretary of Labor would not have
appealed.The CHAIRMAN. But had you, the Court, concluded that eliminating lead was economically feasible, on the one hand, or that this
was coercion, either of those two things, then the company would
have lost and the plaintiffs would have won. Judge BORK. That is correct. The CHAIRMAN. All right. Senator HATCH. Right. But the important thing is how does the
judge determine technical, scientific questions like this except by
relying on experts? Judge BORK. We did not rely upon the experts directly. We relied
upon the finding of the administrative law judge who had heard
the experts or had heard the evidence. Senator HATCH. Right. In other words, she took the evidence, she
took the experts, and she then found the facts to be as they were
stated in the case, and you relied on it as an appellate judge. Judge BORK. Yes. I do not recall that anybody challenged that
factual finding.Senator HATCH. NO, I do not think anybody did in that matter. The CHAIRMAN. Let me ask a question again, just to try to get
the facts. I am trying to understand this. When the administrative law judge's finding came to the court,
the circuit court, was there evidence, even though she rejected it,
that it was economically feasible? Judge BORK. That I do not recall, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. Senator HATCH. NOW, let me ask you this: Were you alone in this
case or were you joined by another colleague? Judge BORK. I was joined by two other colleagues, one a visiting
district judge from California and one Justice Scalia, then Judge
Scalia. Senator HATCH. Scalia again. That guy seems to get you in trouble. Judge BORK. I am going to speak to him about this whole thing. Senator HATCH. YOU had better stay away from him. On second
thought, maybe we had better get you there so you can have a good
influence on him on the Court. I think one further point. The company was charged with preventing any women of child-bearing age from being exposed to
lead. Now, could the company have been charged with a legal violation if it had simply fired all the women in that department? Judge BORK. NO, not under this statute. If they had said any
woman of child-bearing age is hereby discharged, there would have
been no challenge. It would not have been a hazard under the act.
Or if they had said that they would—and the union conceded this,
the argument. If the company had said that only sterile women
will be employed, there would have been no argument about hazardous policy. It was merely the fact that the company said, you
have got to leave this place; if you do not want to, there is the
option of sterilization. That is all that happened. Senator HATCH. SO, in fact, the only reason the company was involved in the lawsuit at all or was sued was because it gave the
women a choice of having an operation or leaving work. So, again, there is a situation where I think the actual facts are distorted by
people who are critics of yours, and I think that is one of the
things that you just have to take into consideration as you look at this nomination. I hope our colleagues will do that.
Now, as I understand it, I am just about out of time.
The CHAIRMAN. Yes, you are, but I have interrupted you a couple times. If you want, take a few more minutes. If the next line is going to be more than 5 minutes or so
Senator HATCH. Let me see if I can get through it in 5 minutes because I think it is important for you. I think what I have been
trying to do in these various days is I have been trying to bring out
just how important your record is and how the facts speak louder
than words, the words of your critics, and how unjustly you have
been treated by certain groups in this society and, I might add, I
think even by people who are judging this matter, even in the
Senate. I think some of them have not looked at these matters and
have not looked at them carefully. I think you deserve that type of
treatment for this type of a position, and it really should not be a
political decision. It ought to be made in a rational way. Maybe we
ought to use the rational basis test to do it, and there would not be any question.
Perhaps the most prized right enumerated in the Constitution is the first amendment. The Congress shall make no law abridging
the freedom of speech. Those who stretch to find some reason to
oppose your record and have tossed allegations about this right
into their junk heap of criticisms, it seems to me, have not looked
at your record again. Because our legal tradition on the first
amendment places a very high burden on prior restraints or at­tempts to censure speech.
Now, what are your thoughts with regard to the doctrine against prior restraints? Judge BORK. Oh, it is a well-settled doctrine. I think it goes back
to Blackstone or something like that. It is a centuries old doctrine,
and it more recently was upheld in Nehr v. Minnesota, I think by
Chief Justice Hughes. It has been applied in the Pentagon Papers case and so forth. The doctrine is essential to a free press.
Senator HATCH. Your record on this point, again, is even strong­er than your words, because you, in fact, decided the case that you
mentioned just a few minute ago with interesting political implications that included a prior restraint. That was Lebron v. Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority case. In that case, you
said that the Metro Authority violated Mr. Lebron's first amendment rights by refusing to let him post extremely critical posters
about President Reagan in the subway cars. Now, as a personal matter, did you find the posters in question
belittled and mocked President Reagan and were sometimes offensive and even misleading?
Judge BORK. Well, we found that you could tell what it was. He
had taken two photographs—one of President Reagan and his advisers laughing and pointing, and one of some poor people—and he
put them together so that President Reagan and his advisers appeared to be laughing and pointing at the poor people who were in
misery. It was not misleading in the sense that if you looked at it
you could tell it was not one photograph. Maybe some people would
mistake it for one photograph, but if you looked at it with any care, you could tell it was not one photograph.
But Judge Starr agreed that it was not misleading and, there­fore, could not be barred. Judge Scalia in this case did not get me into trouble; he agreed that you could not let an agency impose a prior restraint. I agreed with both of them. I agreed it was not mis­leading, really, and also that you could not impose a prior re­straint.
Senator HATCH. Here is another illustration where you did not let your personal feelings enter into the decision of a legal question like that. In my mind, that single case speaks volumes about your fidelity to the rule of law and the meaning of the first amendment.
One of the criticisms we have heard concerning your first amend­ment views is that you suggested over 15 years ago that the first amendment should not cover more than political speech, thus leav­ing artistic and scientific speech without protection. Now, you have made it clear that that is not your current opinion; is that right?
Judge BORK. Well, yes. It certainly cannot be confined to political speech. Where the spectrum ends as a theoretical matter, I do not know. I have not rethought it. But I would have a much broader view of it as theoretical matter, but I accept and do not question the current position of first amendment law.
Senator HATCH. I wish I had the time to go through all of your cases on this, but let me just mention a few. In the commercial speech case, in Williamson Tobacco v. FTC, that is where you held that the first amendment prohibits the FTC from restricting or giving prior approval to some advertising speech. Your opinion, it seems to me, made it clear that you would not tolerate even the slightest degree of censorship. Again, I would say actions speak louder than words, because you were certainly protecting more than political speech there, and you oppose censorship.
By the way, my records indicate that Justice Scalia and Judge Edwards also joined you in that unanimous opinion; is that right?
Judge BORK. That is correct.
Senator HATCH. Okay.
The CHAIRMAN. Orrin, we are about ten to 12 minute over now, and we are going to have to break for lunch. Senator HATCH. Just give me one more minute, then. The CHAIRMAN. Okay. Senator HATCH. Let me just go through these cases. The critics overlooked your opinion governing scientific speech.
In McBride v. Merrill-Dow Inc., you upheld scientific speech in a libel case. I will just say that much about it.
In the Oilman case, you filed a concurring opinion which dis­missed a defamation suit against columnists Evans and Novak. Of course, it would be interesting to describe your reasoning in that particular case.
You could just go on and on. Let me just bring out a case of CCNV v. Watt. You joined a dissent in the case concerning the demonstrators who were camping out in Lafayette Park. That is an interesting case.
Well, you could go on and on. I think the point I am trying to say is that even when these involved conservative issues, you ruled on the side of free speech.
Judge BORK. Yes. Senator HATCH. Time after time after time. So, again, let me just end with this comment: The thing that really comes home to me as
I read your record, as I read your cases, as I look at what you have
done is that your actions do speak louder than words. As a judge,
you have been right down the line in some of these areas where
they are trying to criticize you, and they are misquoting you and
they are mischaracterizing your decisions and they are ignoring
some of your decisions that really make your case as they try to, I
think, mischaracterize some of your other decisions. So let me just say this: I hope the American people pay attention
to these hearings because I think you have made a very good case
for yourself. I think you have shown that you are The CHAIRMAN. I was not laughing at the judge making the case.
I think you are making a very good case, but people are getting
very hungry.Senator HATCH. That is fine. I am going to make one more Judge BORK. I must say, Mr. Chairman, I am always hungry for
this kind of talk. Senator HATCH. YOU are hungry, too. The CHAIRMAN. Your staff back there are going, When are we
getting back?Senator HATCH. I can see that I have overstayed my welcome. You have made a good case for yourself. You have made a good
case for yourself by your actions, and I just submit to the American
people that, by gosh, it is time they look at those actions and they
also scrutinize the criticisms. If they do, they will find that most of
the criticisms that are lodged against you, if not all of them, are
really severely wanting. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your time. The CHAIRMAN. Unless you would like to comment, Judge, we
will recess until 2 o'clock.
AFTERNOON SESSION
The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order, please. We will
continue with the questioning on half-hour rounds with those Senators who wish to continue to question. I will continue to withhold
my half-hour. I will probably interject myself in here somewhere
along the line, depending on who is here. Our next questioner is the Senator from Massachusetts, and then
we will go to Senator Simpson. The Senator from Massachusetts,
Senator Kennedy.Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Judge Bork, I know there has been a great deal of discussion already about your conduct in Watergate when you fired Archibald
Cox, the Watergate special prosecutor. I want to put the facts in
perspective, and then we would welcome an opportunity for you to
respond.In Nader v. Bork, District Court Judge Gesell ruled that you
broke the law when you fired Mr. Cox. The decision was later vacated on other grounds. The question is, what conclusion can we draw from the fact of the decision and the fact that it was later
vacated? You argue that it now has no legal effect at all. It is as
though the judge had never decided that you broke the law. But
the only judge who ever considered the question did conclude that
you broke the law. You can take the opinion out of the law, but
you cannot take it out of the history books, and you cannot even take it out of the law books.
It seems to me the analogy is a bit like a baseball game. Let us say a player makes a serious error in the first inning and the official scorer rules that he made the error; then in the second inning,
the rains come down and the game is called because of the weather. Under the rules of baseball, the error does not count in the
season statistics for the player, but everybody in the stadium knows that he has made a serious error.
In Watergate, Mr. Bork, everybody knows that a federal judge ruled that you broke the law when you fired Archibald Cox during the very dramatic period in our country's history.
I would welcome whatever comment that you would like to make. Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I am afraid that it is not true that
everybody knows that I broke the law. The fact is at worst I acted
before rescinding a regulation put out by the Attorney General for
the Department. Even on that view of the case, Archibald Cox re­ferred to that as, at most, a technical defect.
But, in addition to that, Senator, the district court relied upon cases that do not apply; that is, cases in which a department head
issued a regulation and then violated it. In this case, the department head issued a regulation, and it was revoked by the President
of the United States when he issued the order. There is no case involving that situation, so I do not think in any sense the very strong terms, the "broke the law," applies to that case.
Senator KENNEDY. The only judge that ever ruled on it—and there is only one that did rule on it—a very respected judge ruled
that you did break the law. I understand your difference with that judge and the logic of his opinion.
Judge BORK. May I say, in addition, Senator, that I tried to appeal that case, and the people who had brought the case were
the ones who asked that it be dismissed. And I never got my chance to review that ruling on appeal, which I very much wanted.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, it became moot, obviously, because Mr. Cox did not desire to remain in the special prosecutor, so eventually it became moot. But I think when we had a number of discussions on this issue in question, it was left somewhat up in the air. I
think that it is important that we have some perspective. You indicated that the only potential rationale for believing that
you broke the law was because of the technical aspects of the law;
that the regulations themselves were not repealed. Do you not
think a Supreme Court nominee must be scrupulous to obey even
the most technical aspects of the law, particularly where the stakes
for the country were so incredibly high?
Judge BORK. The stakes for the country were high but not in the
sense you mean, I think, because from the beginning I was determined that the investigations would go forward and, if justified,
result in prosecutions. So there was no stake for the country in my
discharging Mr. Cox before revoking the regulation. Had I revoked the regulation, first there would not even have been this discus­sion. But as I have said before, the President revoked the regula­tion in his order, and no case holds that he may not do that.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, the letter itself did not actually say that he revoked the regulations, did it?
Judge BORK. It said abolish the office of special prosecutor.
Senator KENNEDY. We do not want to leave the record to suggest that he said in his letter that he hereby revoked the regulations. He said abolish the office.
Judge BORK. He said exactly, Senator, "I direct you to discharge Mr. Cox immediately and to take all steps necessary to return to the Department of Justice the functions now being performed by the Watergate Special Prosecution Force." That is a statement that "I am telling you to revoke the regulation/' and as a presidential order, there is no case that says the President may not do that.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, the one judge that ruled on the legality of that found that it was illegal.
Judge BORK. One judge who ruled on it said so. I respectfully dis­agree with him, and I think the cases he relied upon are a different kind of thing altogether. And as I repeat, Mr. Cox himself, who chose not to sue, said that it was, at most—at most—a technical defect.
Senator KENNEDY. Judge Bork, you have testified in these hear­ings that you see no constitutional basis for a number of landmark decisions by the Supreme Court upholding some of the most funda­mental rights and liberties of the American people. In the course of these hearings, you have expressed your strong disagreement with such decisions as the poll tax case, Harper v. Virginia Board of Education; the one-man, one-vote, Reynolds v. Sims decision, the decision invalidating racially restrictive covenants; the decision striking down segregated schools here in the District of Columbia; the important decision recognizing that American citizens have a right to privacy, free from intrusion of government; and key deci­sions protecting the freedom of speech.
Now, notwithstanding your strong criticisms of these and other cases, you have asked us to accept your statements that you would not lightly or easily vote to overturn these precedents. But in a number of past speeches while you have been a judge, you have had some less reassuring things to say about your philosophy and your respect for precedent.
In 1982, you told the National Review, and I quote, "My own phi­losophy is interpretivist, and I must say that this puts me in a dis­tinct minority among law professors. By my count, there were in recent years perhaps 5 interpretivists on the faculty of the 10 best known law schools, and now the President has put four of them on courts of appeals. That is why faculty members who do not like much else about Ronald Reagan regard him as a great reformer."
Did you really believe in 1982 that you were only one of five pro­fessors in the ten best law schools that saw the light?
Judge BORK. Senator Kennedy, that was an after-dinner speech, and it was a joke. The full quotation goes something to the effect that there were five of us and President Reagan has put four of us on courts. That means that some of my colleagues who do not like
much else about President Reagan regard him as a great reformer of legal education. There was quite a laugh when I said that. It was a joke.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, we will put the whole statement in, and I hope members would read it because you list actually the names of the judges themselves and where they are. It appears to me much more than just a passing comment.
Judge BORK. Senator, you are referring to the National Review article? Senator KENNEDY. Yes. I stand to be corrected. Which has the judges' names? The judges' names are not in that speech. They are in a different speech where you make a similar reference. I would include those.
Judge BORK. In the similar speech, Senator, what I said was that there were new people coming along who wanted to interpret the Constitution according to original understanding and I named them. I did not say there were only five in the world. This in the National Review came from an after-dinner speech I gave, and that was a laugh line.
Senator KENNEDY. We will include in the record the other talk where you did list the ones that you were referring to.
Senator KENNEDY. Let me just continue. Next, you told us in these hearings that your views are changing in a number of contro­versial areas, but you told the "District Lawyer" in 1985 when you were a judge, and I quote,
It is always embarrassing to sit here and say, no, I have not changed anything, because I suppose one should always claim growth. But the fact is, no, my views have remained about what they were. After all, courts are not that mysterious, and if you deal with them enough and teach their opinions enough, you are likely to know a great deal. So when you become a judge, I do not think your viewpoint is likely to change greatly.
Then you told the Federalist Society in 1987, and I quote, An originalist judge would have no problem whatever in overruling a non-origina­list precedent because that precedent, by the very basis of his judicial philosophy has no legitimacy.
Finally, Mr. Bork, there is an audio tape of remarks which you made at Canisius College in Buffalo on October 8, 1985. With the Chairman's permission, I would like to have the committee hear an excerpt from the tape which contains your answer to a question about your views on your respect for precedent. We have heard you testify about your position on this issue in these hearings, and I think it would be helpful to the committee to hear the actual manner in which you commented on the issue in 1985.
First, we will hear the question and then we will hear from Mr. Bork. The CHAIRMAN. Let me ask this. Judge Bork, yesterday I gave you a transcript of a speech. I assume it is the same.
Senator KENNEDY. Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. If there is no objection, then
Judge BORK. May I ask what the first piece you referred to was? You referred to the 1987 Federalist Society, Senator, and then you referred to a Canisius College question?
Senator KENNEDY. This is a question and answer.
Judge BORK. But what was the first thing you referred to before that? I think there was some writing. Senator KENNEDY. "District Lawyer." Judge BORK. "District Lawyer." Senator KENNEDY. If we could hear the question.
Question. If I can follow that up. Now, the relationship between the judge, the text, and precedent, what do you do about precedent?
"Mr. Bork. I don't think that in the field, of constitutional law, precedent is all that important. And I say that for two reasons. One is historical and traditional. The Court has never thought constitutional precedent was all that important—the reason being that if you construe a statute incorrectly, the Congress can pass a law and correct you. If you construe the Constitution incorrectly, Congress is helpless. Everybody is helpless. You're the final word. And if you become convinced that a prior court has misread the Constitution, I think it's your duty to go back and cor­rect it. Moreover, you will from time to time get willful courts who take an area of law and create precedents that have nothing to do with the name of the Constitu­tion. And if a new court comes in and says, "Well, I respect precedent," what you have is a ratchet effect, with the Constitution getting further and further and fur­ther away from its original meaning, because some judges feel free to make up new constitutional law and other judges in the name of judicial restraint follow prece­dent. I don't think precedent is all that important. I think the importance is what the framers were driving at, and to go back to that.
Senator KENNEDY. Judge Bork, in light of what we have just heard, how can anyone have confidence that you will respect the decisions of the Supreme Court with which you disagree?
Judge BORK. Well, I will tell you why, Senator. Let me go down the items you have mentioned. I will address that specifically and at some length because it is a difficulty. Let me start down the items you mentioned.
You mentioned the "District Lawyer," an answer about where I said it is embarrassing to sit here and say I have not changed. The question was, "Has your view of the possible usurpation of political functions by courts changed since you ascended to the bench?" Not all my views; my views about courts taking over areas that belong to the legislature.
And I said, It is always embarrassing to sit here and say, no, I have not changed anything because I suppose one should always claim growth. But the fact is, no, my views have remained about where they were. After all, courts are not all that mysterious, and if you deal with them enough and teach their opinions enough, you are likely to know a great deal.
The CHAIRMAN. If the Senator will yield and Judge, because we have been over this several times. You made a distinction at the outset of your answer. Would you repeat the distinction you were making about what you were referring to, so I understand it?
Judge BORK. All right. The question was, Before you ascended to the bench, and indeed, in lectures and writings even since that time, you have been among the people who have challenged the role of what you and they have called the "imperial judiciary." Has your view of the possible usurpation of political functions by courts changed since you ascended to the bench, either become stronger or perhaps more diffuse?
And I said no, my view of courts taking over political functions had not changed. The CHAIRMAN. SO the answer relates to courts taking over polit­ical functions?
Judge BORK. That is right. It does not relate to all other views of mine. In no way am I saying I have not changed any view of mine. Just that one aspect.
The CHAIRMAN. One more thing. What did you mean and what do you think they meant by "political functions"?
Judge BORK. I think I meant and I think they meant functions that belonged to the legislature under the Constitution. And I said no, my view—that that is not proper—have not changed.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
Judge BORK. NOW, in the Federalist Society speech, you have the original notes there, Senator. I do not know if you do, but the com­mittee has them. I had some typed remarks, not much but a few, and somebody before me spoke and I scribbled in the margin about an originalist judge, et cetera, need not worry or something about overruling a non-originalist decision because a non-originalist deci­sion has no legitimacy. In the next paragraph, which was the typed part of my speech, I then gave an example of non-originalist deci­sions that should not be overruled.
That was a commerce clause decision, not in conformity with the original intent of those who drafted the commerce clause, but that clause has been expanded so much it cannot be cut back and I said
that in the next paragraph, so I was certainly not saying you could overrule anything. Now, as to this tape you just played, Senator, generally what I said there is correct and the reason for it is this and it is the reason that every judge has given.
If there is an incorrect constitutional interpretation, the legisla­ture cannot change it. The political forces of the nation are help­less unless they can amend the Constitution. If there is an incor­rect interpretation of a statute, the legislature can correct it. That is why it has always been true that the doctrine of stare decisis or a doctrine of precedent has always applied more severely in statu­tory fields than in the constitutional field.
I learned that in my first year in law school in a course taught by Edward Levi, who had just written an article in a book called "Introduction to Legal Reasoning" in which he points out that the Court has always felt that way. Now, that is a perfectly standard view.
The CHAIRMAN. Again, for clarification, Judge, again I apologize for being slow on this. The distinction again being a constitutional decision based upon statutory interpretation?
Judge BORK. No, no, the distinction has always been that courts are more respectful of precedent in statutory fields than they are in constitutional fields.
The CHAIRMAN. Give us an example of each so we all know what you are talking about.
Judge BORK. Well, to get a constitutional decision such as in a case we have talked about. The court decided Plessy v. Ferguson,establishing the rule of separate but equal for the races, in about 1896, I believe. The Congress could do nothing about that, really.
The CHAIRMAN. That was constitutional versus statutory?
Judge BORK. That was a constitutional decision.
The CHAIRMAN. That is all I am trying to make sure of.
Judge BORK. Yes. The Congress could do nothing about that.
The CHAIRMAN. I understand that.
Judge BORK. And the Court overruled it in Brown v. Board of Education. Now, this is a standard view. For example, I will show you Justice Brandeis. He is talking about stare decisis is not a uni­versal, inexorable command. In most matters, he says however, it is more important that the applicable rule of law be settled than that it be settled right.
Then he says, and this is from a case, Burnett v. Colorado Oil and Gas:
This is true, even where the error is a matter of serious concern, provided correc­tion can be had by legislation, but in cases involving the Federal Constitution, where correction through legislative action is practically impossible, this Court has often overruled its earlier decision. The Court bows to the lessons of experience and the force of better reasoning, recognizing that the process of trial and error, so fruit­ful in the physical sciences, is appropriate also in the judicial function.
Then, just one more quotation. Justice William O. Douglas said
in a case:
The judge remembers above all else that it is the Constitution which he swore to support and defend, not the gloss which his predecessors may have put on it. So he comes to formulate his own views, rejecting some earlier ones as false and embrac­ing others. He cannot do otherwise unless he lets men, long dead and unaware of the problems of the age in which he lives, do his thinking for him.
Now, those quotations are no stronger than what I said, but what I said, Senator, it is to be remembered, was in a give and take, question and answer session after a speech. It was a quick answer. It was not a prepared statement. Now you have other speeches and interviews of mine, in the past, and I have stated the matter more fully.
And in the same year as that speech, in the "District Lawyer" interview, I said—it is the same year as the speech which you played—there are some constitutional decisions around which so many other institutions and people have built, that they have become a part of the structure of the Nation. They ought not to be overturned, even if thought to be wrong.
The example I usually give, because I think it is a non-controver­sial, is the broad interpretation of the commerce power by the courts. So many statutes, regulations, governmental institutions, private expectations and so forth, have been built up around that broad interpretation of the commerce clause that it would too late, even if a justice or a judge became certain that broad interpreta­tion is wrong, as a matter of original intent, it is too late to over­turn it and tear it up.
I said the same thing in the "Federal Society" speech to which you have referred so that aside from a quick answer at a college one night after a speech, I have been fully consistent, in these hearings, with what I have said before and I have told you the same thing about the commerce clause, the legal tender cases, the equal protection clause, in the first amendment and so forth, that I have told you about that precedent.
Senator KENNEDY. I just mention here, to continue on, the next question in the "District Lawyer" article about the subject of pru­dential restraint, where people have relied on precedents. You were asked whether "your view would be that a justice is entitled, as part of his responsibilities, to re-examine a constitutional ques­tion de novo?"Your answer was "I think that is true of a justice and true of a lower court judge unless he is bound by Supreme Court precedent. After all, there are a lot of considerations that go into it. But at bottom, a judge's basic obligation or basic duty is to the Constitution, not simply to precedent."
Now, in the course of these hearings, on Tuesday, in evaluating precedent—included that in the record—you pointed out that we should make sure the decision was incorrectly decided and then de­termine whether governmental and private institutions have grown up around that prior decision.
In the Canisius College speech, you made the unqualified state­ment,
I don't think that in the field of constitutional law, precedent is all that impor­tant and if you become convinced that a prior court has mis-read the Constitution, I think it's your duty to go back and correct it. I don't think a precedent is all that important.
Those statements speak for themselves. Your own words cast strong doubt upon your adherence to precedent that you think is wrong.
Judge BORK. Senator, you and I both know that it is possible, in a give and take question and answer period, not to give a full and measured response. You and I both know that when I have given a full and measured response, I have repeatedly said there are some things that are too settled to be overturned. The Canisius College thing was not my speech. That was a bunch of students questioning me afterwards.
It is not the kind of thing that ought to be weighed against my more considered statements when I am not just engaging in give and take. We all make statements that are not fully balanced in a give and take. You mentioned something from the "District Lawyer" which I, at the moment, cannot find.
Senator KENNEDY. It is the next question down after the last one. The only point I want to make, Judge, is that I think it is impor­tant to understand that this is not just an off-handed legal ques­tion. The question of judicial restraint has been something that you must have been thinking about for years. I for one would not accept the concept that a person that has been teaching, a profes­sor, who has been dealing with these issues for a long period of time, that this is just an off-handed comment about legal theorem.
You have been thinking about it. You have worked at it. It is your life. You made the statements and we have read a series of statements, rather than just this one, and this body has had an opportunity to listen to your voice and how you characterize that. It seems to me that your series of statements make an extremely convincing case as to what your real beliefs are with regard to precedent, and that is going to have to stand.
We have your other testimony and people are going to have to evaluate that against what you have said as a judge. A great deal, in the course of these hearings, has been made—let's not go back over the old years; let's go and consider what he has said as a judge. We have used these examples, a series of statements that all reinforce themselves.
The fact remains, you were sitting as a federal judge at this very time of the Canisius remarks. I think that federal judges are ex­pected to understand, or be able to give a pretty good definition, of how they are going to respond to precedent.
Judge BORK. The only aspect that I addressed in that question, Senator, the only aspect that I addressed was the distinction be­tween the theory of precedent or stare decisis in a constitutional context and a statutory context. That is the only time you can say I did not go on to say something more. In the Federalist Society speech, which you quoted, I did, in the next paragraph, say of course, there are some decisions that are so rooted you cannot turn them over.
In "The District Lawyer"—in which I still have not found what I said—but you quoted me as saying at bottom, the judge's obligation is to the Constitution, which is, of course, true. But right before that, I said a lot of considerations go into whether to overturn or not, which is what I have said here. So with a single exception, I think, of one after-speech question and answer session, I have con­sistently said what I have said here.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, I think the record will speak for itself. I have no further questions of the nominee. I would like to just use the remaining 2 or 3 minutes for a comment. I think Mr. Bork has claimed that he is only applying neutral principles, but there is something wrong with neutral principles if the result is that Congress and the courts must be neutral in the face of discrimination
because of race, they must be neutral in the face of discrimination
against women and in the face of gross invasions by the Govern­ment of individual citizen's rights to privacy.
Above all, a Supreme Court Justice must be fair, but in life-time of writings on the public record, Mr. Bork has shown his bias
against women and minorities and in favor of big business and
Presidential power. It is small comfort to minorities to know that
some years after the Civil Rights Act was passed over his opposition, Mr. Bork changed his mind and said that it had worked all
right. But if you had had your way, Mr. Bork, no one would ever have known how the Civil Rights Act would work.
Mr. Bork is against the one man, one vote decision of the Su­preme Court, which says that everyone's vote should count equally
and the same. He would allow majorities to write laws that give
greater weight to some people's vote than others and that is the
very opposite of democracy. Mr. Bork asks us to judge him on his
record, as a judge, but in his own speeches, as a judge, he has shown little respect for past decisions of the Supreme Court.
Again and again on the public record, he has suggested that he is prepared to roll back the clock, return to more troubled times,
uproot decades of settled law in order to write his own ideology
into law. And in these hearings this week, he has asked us to believe that he can make a U-turn in these areas of fundamental importance. The question all of us are asking is who is the real
Robert Bork and what risks are we taking for the future if he becomes a Justice of the Supreme Court with the last word about jus­tice in America.
The White House strategy, in these proceedings, has been clear. Mr. Bork's balloon was losing altitude in the Senate, and he has
been rapidly jettisoning the baggage of a lifetime in opposition to
individual liberty and equal justice. President Reagan has failed to
achieve his ideological agenda in Congress and is not entitled to
achieve it by an ideological nomination to the Supreme Court that
could reverse the progress of the past and tilt the country far beyond the end of his term.
America is ready to move forward with the Supreme Court, not backward. But Mr. Bork is out of step with the Congress, out of
step with the country, out of step with the Constitution and many
of the most fundamental issues facing America. Mr. Bork is a walking constitutional amendment and he should not be confirmed by the Senate.
Judge BORK. Senator, if those charges were not so serious, the discrepancy between the evidence and what you say would be
highly amusing. I have not asked that either the Congress nor the
courts be neutral in the face of racial discrimination. I have upheld
the laws that outlaw racial discrimination. I have consistently supported Brown v. Board of Education in my writings long ago. I have never written a word hostile to women.
I have never written a word hostile to privacy. I have complained about the reasoning of one Supreme Court case. I have never writ­ten a word or made a decision from which you can infer that I am pro-big business at the expense of other people. And as far as Presi­dential power is concerned, I have very rarely dealt with that, but
when I have, it is on constitutional principles and upon occasion, as in the pocket veto matter, you will find me squarely opposing Pres­idential power.
I have no ideological agenda and if I did, it would not do me any good because nobody else on the Court has an ideological agenda and I do not intend, if confirmed, to be the only person up there, running around with a political agenda. In fact, nothing in my record suggests I have a political or ideological agenda.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think my time is ex­pired and I think the record speaks for itself. We have had an op­portunity to review those items in previous questioning and the members will have to make their own judgment.
Judge BORK. I agree with that, Senator Kennedy.
The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Wyoming.
Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I have shared with you that I practiced law for 18 years and have legislated for 24 and I have enjoyed that thoroughly. In these last 4 days, I have become totally convinced of what I thought was inad­equacy, but has actually proven to be a great, remarkable asset. I never wrote any books. I wrote a lot of briefs. There are no written speeches of Al Simpson. I knew I was on the right track years ago.
The CHAIRMAN. I think you will find a bunch of them are taped, Al. I am finding that out right now.  And not all of them turn out to be mine either.
Senator SIMPSON. Well, next question please. That is typical of your grace in this situation and like you and I like that. You need that. Keep your humor, it sure throws the rest of them off. They do not know what the hell to do with it. But, I never wrote any stuff. I worked hard and I worked hard to be a great lawyer and I work hard to be a great legislator or statesman. I work hard because I do not like to make an ass out of myself. There really is nothing else in it for me.
And when you said this morning—it was very moving—when you said something to the effect—and it was just two or three words, so I must be pretty close to it—that you did not want to go down in history or to be disgraced in history, that you have said and stated your position absolutely clearly and if anyone could believe that you are going to go on the Supreme Court and not do it all differ­ently, you would be disgraced in history. Isn't that what you said?
Judge BORK. I did indeed. I should make an additional point. I also took an oath, when I came in before this committee, to tell the truth and I take an oath very seriously and that is what I have done is told the truth.
Senator SIMPSON. Well, I think that is something for people to hear very clearly. Indeed, you did take an oath and you take that oath very seriously and you have a belief in a higher being and that is what makes the oath worth taking. That is how that works. That ain't corny. That is the way that is.
But again, back to writings. It was curious to me and it has been like a law school seminar in some situations to hear you and my fine friend from Pennsylvania discussing certain areas of the law in a highly honed way. For me to listen to this is educational and very fascinating how you get into it and both can bat it around— and others. And Senator Metzenbaum with his antitrust. Having never written a book—this fellow said he had written in the area of probate—he wrote a very provocative book called "The Role of the Decedent in Estate Planning." I could have written a book like that and I thought that that is the only title I could have probably gotten away with.
But, I had an awful lot of fun practicing law in a profession that I dearly loved and I wrote some awfully stupid letters. People still bring them to my attention. I tried some really goofy cases, losers, total losers. In pro bono—we really did not get going on pro bono until I was about 3 or 4 years into the practice, about 1963. Some­body said, you know, we ought to do some pro bono. We said, well we will so the Park County Bar Association said we will do, you know, blank hours a month, each of us and check the book.
I do not know how many lawyers did it that way. We did. We thought we were pro bono automatically. We were charging 10 bucks an hour for our work. So, pro bono was not what it is now.
That again is kind of what this whole thing is about. We are judging you on the basis of September 18th, 1987, when they forget everything that was swirling around in 1964 and 1971 and 1980, whenever. That's, I think, total distortion.
Back to that extraordinary case, the "illegal" case, that you did something illegal. Well, I tell you, I used to use Black's law diction­ary only when I was in extremity. The word "vacate" in Black's law dictionary says "To amend, to set aside, to cancel, or rescind; to render an act void; to vacate an entry of record or judgment." It is not synonymous with "suspend," which means to stay enforce­ment of judgment or decree—to put an end to.
I hope we can put an end to what must be another goofy case where the party that won didn't want to go any further with it.
Now, you don't have to be a real wizard to know that must be a real turkey. And it was vacated. And that ought to be the end of that, surely.
So I guess what we, who support your nomination—I guess we kind of come out and say, ah, that's crazy, how can that be? But, obviously, that isn't enough, because those on the other side say highly dramatic things: you have shocked my senses, you have left me limp, I cannot believe what I have read, you have stunned me.
Well, I tell you, why wouldn't someone in America be alarmed to see the distortion of your record. How would anyone not, any sensi­ble American not be disturbed if they read your record? The word "poll tax" is immediately equated with racism. I think we all ought to get awfully tired of that; that case had nothing to do with racism, nothing. The words "poll tax" have a marvelous connota­tion—no, a hideous connotation of racism. And you would have trashed it in a minute, would you have not, if it had anything to do with racism?
Judge BORK. Of course, the basis of my discussion of that case was that it had nothing to do with racism and therefore it was a little hard to follow some of the reasoning. I should say—I've just been handed the opinion in that case, Senator, and Justice Hugo Black dissented from that ruling that the poll tax was automatical­ly unconstitutional, even when there was no racism. And in his dis­sent, he said:
"It should be pointed out at once that the Court's decision is to no extent based on a finding that the Virginia law, as written or as applied, is being used as a device or a mechanism to deny Negro citizens of Virginia the right to vote on account of their color. Apparently the Court agrees with the district court below, and with my broth­ers Harlan and Stewart, that this record would not support any finding that the Virginia poll tax law the Court invalidates has any such effect.
That is, any such discriminatory effect. Hugo Black said that very plainly, and, indeed, the Court did not claim that there was any racial animus in that poll tax.
Senator SIMPSON. Yet that has been presented day after day, hour after hour, on the hour—in fact, they all are presented on the hour, or on the half hour—the same ones; and they always have the charged word "anti-black," "racist," "sterilization of your fellow human beings," "contraceptives," "homosexuality/' "sexual preference," "women's rights." You know, really, what a bizarre exercise. It must be something for you to observe—and you are ob­serving it, you are living it.
How do you feel about it all?
Judge BORK. Senator, I have not yet had time to gather my thoughts on the entire matter. Let me say that it is not terribly enjoyable.
Senator SIMPSON. NO, I think not, but I think it will be concluded shortly. And it's been a very fair hearing—and a good one, and you like it somewhere down in there.
Judge BORK. Oh, Senator, I love it.
Senator SIMPSON. All right, now, several Senators have gone through the list of your actions and views and cases and amicus briefs, and the full-page newspaper ads have continued in harsh and hysterical tones, and repeated and supplemented your, "record", which is really so grossly distorted, from prior writings and speeches. And, you know, when I ask who these groups are, I never really can find out; it's really getting to be a phantom kind of a networking operation now—they are running out of gas, or money, and nobody really takes any responsibility. I wasn't going to use the word "credit"—that would be a disservice.
But other items in these listings and in these advertisings are not only unfair, in my mind—and in some cases outrageous; they are dishonest—I will use that term—and they are lies—I will even use that term, because that's more perfunctory and more real, and one that I'd love to stick with: lies. And those are words that people know, words like "lie."
Going over this list that we have heard this morning—and I've had my list over the last 3 days—on what you have done on the court, which are not anything more than things of the record, which are precise and irrefutable; they are in the statutes, in the law books. So when we get to what is the point, what kind of a Jus­tice will this man be as a Supreme Court judge, it is quite helpful to see what he was as an appellate judge. And I am not going to go through the cases that have already been reported about female Foreign Service officers entitled to the same pay as similarly em­ployed male officers—you did that; holding that intentional sex dis­crimination can be inferred solely on statistical evidence—a mar­velous pro-civil rights decision; female stewardesses may not be paid less than male pursers with similar jobs; two cases on title 7, which were liberally construed, which in effect kept the courthouse door open for aggrieved people who claimed employment discrimi­nation—that hasn't been quoted before, and that's Nordell v. Heck­ler and Tyrell v. U.S. Postal Service—you kept the door open, other people were trying to shut it on blacks and others; the senior mili­tary officers case and the promotion decision on the black officer— you did that, you opened that door for him; the South Carolina vote where there was an at-large election without first proving that the change would have no discriminatory effect against blacks— you did that, you opened that door, that isn't something you talk about on a podium or sing about—you did it. That's not the view of a judge who is hostile to women and minorities; it sounds to me like a very compassionate man.
I hope the people of America are seeing that in you, a judge who has expanded civil rights during every bit of his writings and deci­sions instead of pinching it down and shutting it off. The earlier Robert Bork, you know, who wrote all those provocative law review articles—well, that's you, too. Theory, I read that yesterday what you said about as you opened and prefaced those remarks in that law review article, and how you ended it.
What was interesting to me was that when you were Solicitor General you filed several briefs supporting the rights of minorities and rights of women when you didn't even have to, didn't you?
Judge BORK. True.
Senator SIMPSON. Why did you do that?
Judge BORK. It seemed to me that it was in accordance with the law. Senator SIMPSON. Was it in accordance with your belief that mi­norities needed protection? Was it in accordance with that, too?
Judge BORK. Yes, it is, Senator, but I should say that if the law isn't there, my beliefs aren't going to influence what I do—the law has to be there.
Senator SIMPSON. That's pretty clear. You get a lot of flak on that, but that's what the system is supposed to be all about.
So then you filed an amicus brief urging and arguing that single-sex schools are unconstitutional and illegal—that was a Philadel­phia case. You filed these because you felt it was the right thing to do under the law. We've all heard several times—and yet it keeps coming back up when they talk about you as being a racist, that you alone took a pretty firm stand in your original law firm and stopped the prejudice against a Jewish lawyer in the firm.
Then you filed another brief—and you mentioned on your first day, Section 1981, which is an old statute—I don't remember the date of it, but I know if we had ever put the right English on the cue ball on that one years ago we could have saved a lot of time in the civil rights laws, wouldn't you agree?
Judge BORK. That's entirely true.
Senator SIMPSON. YOU bet. So 1981, Section 1981, is a most impor­tant civil rights statute. And you filed a brief which said it was the most important one prior to the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Judge BORK. I didn't say it prior to 1964, that's right; I said the statute was the most important one before the 1964 one. Senator SIMPSON. When applied to racially discriminatory pri­vate contracts.
Well, Gordon Humphrey has reviewed some of those, Orrin Hatch has reviewed some of those.
You filed another amicus brief, successfully arguing the 14th amendment gave Congress the complete power to remedy State or local violations of the amendment. Now, that one decision right there is probably the most critical one of getting things done under the civil rights law, is that not correct?
Judge BORK. I think so.
Senator SIMPSON. That one has escaped people, apparently—Fitz­patrick v. Bitzer. That was absolutely essential to the federal elimi­nation of racial discrimination, is that not true?
Judge BORK. I guess so. Senator, I don't have that—I'm afraid I filed so many briefs in my time
Senator SIMPSON. I'm sure that's true. But, in any event, it was essential—and you did that. Then you represented the position of unions—you went through those other cases. And no one has really presented any honest evidence of you doing these heinous things in this country, and that really—well, that galls me—I'm not going to ask you what it does with you. Because I believe in fairness. You know, you can play this game of politics—and I love it, I can bat around in it, chew up in it, snarl, and then go off and have a light glass of ale with some guys who I vote with 5 percent of the time— but that's fun for me, because that's the way I practiced law.
So to hear these things said about you—the best and most attrac­tive phrase, it just seems wierd, absolutely wierd, to hear that when the cases are there. I think it shows how much we are talk­ing past each other with regard to you. I hope we are somewhere listening in this process and that our colleagues on the floor will be listening, because it would be a great disservice to talk past each other as regards you. And if it's not being heard, that would be indeed too bad. And if that happens and goes on, they will not know about you.
I was interested again in that issue of precedent and overruling and so on. I don't know how you can get any more clear than that—I really don't—because in the same article that is being used to drum you about the head and shoulders, this "District Lawyer" article—you said it all in there, that, you know, if things had been built up, regulations and governmental institutions and private ex­pectations had been built up around that, it's too late, even if a jus­tice or judge became certain that broad interpretation is wrong in the matter of original intent, to tear it up and overturn it. That's what you said. And then at the end of that article you said "If the Justices have become convinced that a decision cannot be squared with the Constitution, they ought to consider overruling it. But the Court should be careful"—these are your words—"If a particular decision has become the basis for a large array of social and eco­nomic institutions, overruling it could be disastrous." You said that, didn't you?
Judge BORK. Yes, I certainly did.
Senator SIMPSON. In the same article that was referred to mo­ments ago—I believe; maybe it was a different one, but it was cer­tainly from the "District Lawyer."
Judge BORK. That's the same article—same interview.
Senator SIMPSON. Here's a statement, call it "Guess Who" time.
He is a dangerous radical. The general opinion is that he is a very able lawyer, a man of keen intellect, but that, as a matter of intellectual honesty, he is not entire­ly trustworthy. He will distort the Court's decisions for generations; he will take his seat equipped with a variety of preconceived notions and firmly held opinions relat­ing only remotely, if at all, to the questions of law, but rather to the questions of a purely political nature concerning social issues.
Now, that was a comment about Justice Louis Brandeis. The
year was 1916. Did you think he panned out all right? Judge BORK. I certainly did. Senator SIMPSON. In the end? Judge BORK. I certainly did. He's become one of the giants of the
Court. Senator SIMPSON. He made the grade. Judge BORK. That's right. Senator SIMPSON. He is not disgraced in history, is he? Judge BORK. Certainly not, certainly not. The names of Holmes
and Brandeis, I suppose, will live as long as our jurisprudence does.
Senator SIMPSON. Well, they will be to all of us who love the law and practiced it and to the people who it affects—and that's every­body else. That was a comment about Justice Brandeis.
How about this one? "He has a record of continued hostility to the law, of continual war on the Constitution. He has already taken sides with the executive branch. He would be but their echo." The National Organization of Women warned that if he were confirmed, "justice for women would be ignored or further de­layed, which means justice denied."
That is a comment about Lewis Powell. What do you think of that one? Judge BORK. They appear to have missed the mark rather sub­stantially. Senator SIMPSON. I think so. One more—and a final one. We opposed his confirmation not solely because of his consistent opposition to women's rights, but, more importantly, because he has demonstrated that his legal opinions on women's issues are based on an apparent personal philosophy and not on the facts and laws and cases before him. Thus he lacks the fairness and the im­partiality requisite for appointment to the Supreme Court of the United States.
That's about Justice John Paul Stevens. What do you think about that comment?
Judge BORK. Just as the comment about Justice Powell, when I said they missed the mark very substantially, I was being a bit wry; they missed the mark by 180 degrees.
Senator SIMPSON. Well, indeed they have, and they have fired all the grapeshot in their cannon at you, and they missed it just as badly. And I think history will bear that out.
I'm interested in another thing—oh, I know one I wanted to cover. Back to the issue of equal protection. How much time do I have, please? Forget it, they are not going to keep track.
The CHAIRMAN. Just keep going. Senator SIMPSON. The issue of equal protection The Chairman. About 6 or 7 minutes, Senator, but, if you need
more time, take it. Senator SIMPSON. YOU noted that the military draft—1 think this is important, I want you to hear this little scheme here. Judge BORK. All right.
Senator SIMPSON. Heh, heh, heh. 
That the draft was a good example of a case where distinctions based on race were improper, but distinctions based on gender were not improper. Now, I should point out to you—I know this is
hideous—that a majority of the Senators agreed with the finding of
the Supreme Court on that, and your example, that gender-based
distinctions are acceptable in certain rare circumstances. On June
10, 1980, the U.S. Senate itself voted to exclude women from President Carter's draft plan by a vote of 51 to 40. A number of people
on this panel participated in that vote, six of us sitting right here,
three Republicans, three Democrats, to exclude women from the
draft.
Now, I just want to make a point that Congress was quite willing
to make a gender-based distinction in this case, present criticisms
and dire comments notwithstanding. I think that's kind of important to kind of touch on occasionally. That's real life.
The first amendment, that is a troubling thing. I cannot believe
that anyone is going to try to blast you away on the first amendment. I do not know of anybody that has done more.
There should not be a person in this country to believe that you
would not broaden it. You have said you would, and, as I say, your
favorite guy that was doing the posters over there, that you allowed him to do that, has done some ever-new ones now. I want to get over and see them, and they are on the wall.
And you gave him all the ability to do that, to raise hell about this President, your President, his President, and he is doing it
again. It is opinion, it is his expression, and, that is real life.
You did that, didn't you, in that case?
Judge BORK. Right.
Senator SIMPSON. I have read that case, and it is fascinating, and of course several have read about the fact that you must be willing
to bear criticism, disparagement, and even wounding assessments.
We all have been through that one. We have been there.
But I loved what you went on to say. You said:
Perhaps it would be better if disputation were conducted in measured phrases, and calibrated assessments, and with strict avoidance of the ad hominem, better, that is, if the opinion and editorial pages of the public press were modeled on The Federalist Papers.
But that is not the world in which we live, ever have lived, or ever likely to know, and the law of the first amendment must not try to make public disputes safe and comfortable for all the participants. That would only stifle the debate.
In our world, the kind of commentary that the columnists have engaged in here is the coin in which the controversialists are commonly paid.
I like that. That is pretty gutsy, strong, fair, firm, protective of
the first amendment, and people. Well, I am going to conclude here, but I hope everyone sees the
essence of what is happening here, the essence of this cause against
Judge Bork. I do not want anybody to miss this.
The opponents of Robert Bork are the opponents of any kind of
change in the Supreme Court in my view. They really wanted to
halt Sandra Day O'Connor. They really did. But they could not
really challenge that remarkable, steady, personable lady. They
just could not do anything with her.
And she is a tremendous lady, and jurist. They really wanted to
toss Rehnquist off the side of the ship. But as they frothed at the
mouth there, they finally sobered up and realized he was already on the Court. That was a dazzling thing for them to decide, that finally, they thought, well, we will kick him off as Chief Justice but he is still going to be there, and then they are going to bring in somebody else.
That brought a note of sobriety to their cause. He was already on the Court. And with Scalia, they saw another bright, dedicated, ar­ticulate spirited man, and they had already spurted all the venom out of their glands with Rehnquist when he came along, and they were then exhausted from the attempt to land the fatal strike on Rehnquist and they slipped back to their lair, or den, whichever you wish
Senator DECONCINI. Will the Senator yield just for a clarifica­tion.
Senator SIMPSON. Yes.
Senator DECONCINI. My recollection on the Sandra Day O'Con­nor, that it was the National Right To Life that testified in opposi­tion to her. The president of that group is a friend of mine, and from Arizona. I had big arguments with her, and she came and tes­tified here in opposition to Sandra O'Connor.
I just thought the record ought to show that. I know the Senator wants to know that all of those so-called radical groups are proper­ly identified, and I do not consider that a radical group.
Senator SIMPSON. I will finish and then you can go on with your explanations. You know, you name them. I am just talking about the fact that there were groups. I do not consider that group a radi­cal group.
What had they learned in the fray after they went through that exercise? They learned really only one thing as I see it.
They learned that you were next. They knew the minute—I think their worst fears were realized—that you are the "live" round that was coming at them the next time, and they went to work.
And when Scalia raised his right hand on his oath, they raised the stakes, and they said "Get Bork. He's next. Can't possibly miss him on the next selection. That's him."
And they put their researchers and their minions to work, and they readied their fund-raising apparatus, and they cranked up the networking, and hours and days of work in a non-unanimous deci­sion venture. Every utterance. I mean, you know, when you are dragging stuff out of a question and answer session at a school in 1985, and then hearing it in—you know—that took a lot of work. A lot of people have done a lot of work.
The CHAIRMAN. Senator, if I can interrupt you just on that point because I think it is very important.
I want the record to show that I went to Judge Bork yesterday, and gave him a full transcript, told him that that tape had been sent, unsolicited, to several people, apparently. I know I was sent a tape. And I did not want him to be caught unaware by anything. I had the tape transcribed, I gave it to him, told him I would not ask him any questions about that tape, and for a full day, to give him a full opportunity to look at it, and I am sure the tape was sent to other people by a student up there, as I recall.
I may be mistaken. So I just do not want you to think that all of a sudden, out of the heavens, came this
Senator SIMPSON. NO, no.
The CHAIRMAN. And then I was asked by a colleague whether or not it could be played. So I just did not want anyone to think that Judge Bork was not fully aware that (a) there was a tape and (b) he had a written transcript, and even outlined—I believe my staff even circled or pointed out for you where that point was.
Judge BORK. NO, I was not caught by surprise, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. I am not suggesting you think you were.
Judge BORK. And I was not disturbed by it because it is an unex­ceptional remark, and it is the only time I did not add a qualifica­tion which I have added on every other occasion. So that does not bother me at all.
Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, I have before me, right here, the excerpt from the question and answer question. It was handed to me this morning.
The CHAIRMAN. I am not suggesting, Alan, in any way, that you should have known that. I just wanted everyone to know, though, that Judge Bork knew of that, and possibly, if I had thought about it, I should have handed the transcript to everyone.
But obviously, the most important person to be aware of it was Judge Bork, and that is all I meant to state. I am not trying to make any more of it than it is.
Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, I will conclude in 2 minutes, and I promise that, from these notes that were thoughtfully pre­pared by me, because I am trying to figure where it all started.
And as I say, it started when Scalia was approved in the most remarkable fashion. That was a remarkable confirmation hearing.
So then they set up their early-warning system: if Robert Bork is nominated it will be destructive, it will be contentious. And then they said this to the American people, after Judge Lewis Powell announced his retirement.
They said if Robert Bork is nominated it will be destructive, con­tentious, quote, "time-consuming"—whatever that connotation—we know what that means in the Senate. It will be a struggle. It will be a watershed, shifting the balance, and, there was a kind of a warning to our President that he should not do this.
When the President nominated you they detonated the package, they were ready to do that, and they did it in a way I think where the shards and the chunks from the explosion, you know, were des­tined to be a little hurtful and painful, and injure.
Because they really do not care about that. The personal anguish of that to you is not important to those kind, and yet they will tell you they represent the oppressed and the disenfranchised, and the powerless, and those who need care. But give them another human being to gnaw on and they will do it in a rather extraordinarily tough, mean, nasty fashion.
So what that they maligned your character, which is all we have in life. Your life style. Why wouldn't any thoughtful American be stunned, and deeply concerned in the full burst of all that, as they fired that around the United States? They were saying you were a racist, a sexist, one who would deny women their rights. A segrega­tionist. A peeper at the keyhole. An invader of privacy. Insensitive
to homosexuals, and in favor of mandatory sterilization of your fellow man and woman. Who wouldn't be frightened by that, or deeply appalled and con­cerned?
Well, I think the American people are terribly fair. They hear, and they know, and you have been right there for four days, and the interested ones have been observing the process, and they have to see you and know your persona as a most extraordinary man, with a dazzling record. A creative, thoughtful man with an agile, adroit and facile mind.
And the American people, and our colleagues would, in my mind, Mr. Chairman, be ill-served, and very certainly cruelly short­changed if you are to be rejected in these proceedings. Thank you.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
I was going to question next but the Senate Majority Leader is here, and I will yield to him, and then to Senator Grassley, as I understand he may have questions.
And then I will take my turn. Judge, would this be an appropri­ate time to take a 5-minute break? Judge BORK. I think if it is all right with the Majority Leader, I think it would be fine. The CHAIRMAN. All right. We will break for 5 minutes and then come back.
 
The CHAIRMAN. The hearing will come to order again.
Let me suggest to those who have been asking in the audience, and the press, and the witness, and my colleagues, that it is my intention to finish—I was going to say finish with you today, Judge Bork—that comes out sounding the wrong way. For us to finish today, and you need not, hopefully, have to come back after today, and move on with, quote, the public witnesses the beginning of the week.
The order will be Senator Byrd, Senator Grassley, and myself, and then I believe after that, Senator Specter, and we will go on down the line from there.
Having said that, I yield to Senator Byrd.
Senator BYRD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I understand that Mr. Metzenbaum wants me to yield to him, briefly.Senator METZENBAUM. I appreciate the courtesy of the Majority Leader.
Judge Bork, when we were talking about the American Cyana­mid case, you said "They offered a choice to the women. Some of them I guess did not want to have children".
Apparently that testimony was heard by one of the women, be­cause a telegram has just been received by the Chairman and myself which reads as follows:
I cannot believe that Judge Bork thinks we were glad to have the choice of get­ting sterilized or getting fired. Only a judge who knows nothing about women who need to work could say that. I was only 26 years old, but I had to work, so I had no choice. It is incredible that a judge who is supposed to be fair can support a compa­ny that does not follow OSHA rules. This was the most awful thing that happened to me. I still believe it's against the law, whatever Bork says. Betty Riggs, Harris-ville, West Virginia.
Judge BORK. That was certainly a terrible thing for that lady, and it was certainly a terrible choice to have to make. Of course the only alternative was that she would have been discharged and had no choice.
I think it was a wrenching case, a wrenching decision for her, a wrenching decision for us, but the entire panel agreed on—the OSHA review commission agreed with us, agreed that it was not a violation of the hazardous conditions provision of the statute.
The entire panel I sat on agreed. The full court, all eleven of us did not sit to reverse it, and I do not know if anybody appealed to the Supreme Court, but if they did, the Supreme Court did not take it.
Senator METZENBAUM. Judge, I do not wish to belabor the point, but I have since been informed, and I do not know if this is fact, that the lead level could have been reduced had the company been willing to expend the necessary funds. I am not certain that that is accurate.
Judge BORK. I am not either, Senator, because that was not in the case. The administrative law judge, as I recall, had found that the lead level could not be reduced, and we do not review factual findings unless there is no substantial evidence for it.
Senator METZENBAUM. I thank the Majority Leader for having yielded. The CHAIRMAN. On this point, to be precise, did they not say that it could not be economically Judge BORK. Well, they probably meant it would close the plant, or close that unit, if they did it.
The CHAIRMAN. Yes.
Judge BORK. Which would also put the women out of a job.
The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from West Virginia.
Senator BYRD. Mr. Chairman, I thank you.
Judge Bork, I am sorry I have not been able to be present to hear the questions and the answers. I have watched whenever I could, but have been busy on the Senate floor, and I do have the tapes of the hearings thus far, and Mr. Chairman, I hope through the weekend to be able to watch the tapes and catchup with the committee in its work.
Judge Bork, I have stated before, and I will state today, that I am undecided as to how I will vote on your nomination.
There are those who may wish to categorize my vote, or pigeon­hole it, or put it in whatever niche they wish, but I do not know how I would vote if I had to cast a vote today.
I have been in the legislative branch of our government now for 42 years, 35 years on Capitol Hill, 29 of which years have been in the Senate.
I have naturally, in that course of time, acquired a deep sense of dedication to the legislative branch, and so the few questions that I will ask will pertain to the subject of congressional standing.
I very much support the constitutional principle of separation of powers, very much support the constitutional principle of checks and balances, and particularly on these two bases, I have a great concern with respect to some of the developments that have oc­curred within the last few years.
And so I am going to ask just a question or two, or three. I un­derstand that Senator Kennedy has already gotten into this area of questions.
But let me say that I would like to follow up on that discussion, and ask you whether the institutions of the House and Senate can bring a case in federal court, to determine what I conceive to be their constitutional rights with respect to the executive branch, let us say.
You spoke about this in the context of the case of Barnes v. Kline, in which the President had vetoed a bill, and the Senate sued to have a court declare that the President's pocket veto was invalid under the circumstances, and that the bill had therefore become the law.
The majority in your court found in favor of the Senate, but I believe you wrote a dissenting opinion on the grounds that the Senate did not have such standing to bring such a case.
I believe you have said in the course of that opinion, that, quote, "We ought to renounce outright the whole notion of congressional standing".
Have I correctly quoted you, Judge Bork.
Judge BORK. YOU have, Senator Byrd. May I say one thing about the case, however? Senator BYRD. Yes. Judge BORK. The majority did not find for the Senate. The majority created a new doctrine in our court, for some reason. In fact, our court is the only court that ever invented the doctrine of con­gressional standing. It does not exist in any other court and it only dates back to 1974. But, what the majority did in this case was say yes, the Congressmen have standing but, in the exercise of our dis­cretion, we will not hear the case, which is yet another novel doc­trine.
Senator BYRD. We will not what?
Judge BORK. Hear the case. They refused to hear the case. They said that Congress has standing, but we have equitable discretion— they called it various names—equitable discretion to refuse to hear it anyway, which is also a revolutionary doctrine, so they refused to hear it.
No, I am sorry. I take it back. I have got the wrong case. I am thinking of Vander Jagt v. O'Neill, in which the majority did invoke equitable discretion and refused to hear the case. That was a case in which Congressman Vander Jagt sued to get proportional representation on House committees. No, that is right. I take it back. In this case, Barnes v. Kline, which involved the same prob­lem, the majority did hear the case on the pocket veto grounds.
Senator BYRD. And I believe that you yourself have been quoted as saying that pocket vetoes can be valid. Am I correct? Judge BORK. They can be valid only in certain circumstances, Senator.
Senator BYRD. Or they can be invalid.
Judge BORK. They can be invalid. That is it. When I was in the Department of Justice as Solicitor General, Senator Kennedy brought a suit about a pocket veto saying it was not a valid pocket veto. The court I now sit on held that it was not a valid pocket veto. I did not ask the Supreme Court to review that because I thought it was an invalid pocket veto.
When the subject came up again in the Ford administration, I told Attorney General Levi that I would not—it was not a pocket veto—that I would not argue the case and would not appear on the brief because I thought it was an invalid pocket veto. I then pre­pared an extensive memorandum, which this committee has, saying that when Congress leaves an officer or somebody behind to receive a return veto, even though they are in adjournment, you must give a return veto and not a pocket veto.
President Ford was persuaded to say that for the remainder of his administration, he would not use the pocket veto if there was somebody here to receive a return veto. That was a clear case in which I advised the executive that he did not have a constitutional power the executive wanted, but that Congress could behave in this way.
Senator BYRD. Let me get back to the particular quotation that I mentioned earlier and I will repeat it. "We ought to renounce, out­right, the whole notion of congressional standing." If that is still your opinion, Judge Bork, what is the basis for that position?
Judge BORK. Well, it is simply this, Senator. I am not hostile to congressional standing any more than I am to Presidential stand­ing or judicial standing. The theory upon which that case—the standing was rested there was that the President was not carrying out a law and that interfered with congressional powers and there­fore, they could sue. But, if that is true, I do not see why, if Con­gress overrides a Presidential veto and he says, that is unconstitu­tional, I do not see why the President cannot sue Congress.
In fact, in the Chadha case, which struck down the legislative veto in the Supreme Court—the President did not have to wait for that case if this governmental standing power is correct. The Presi­dent could have sued long ago to strike down the legislative veto. And it is not just Presidential standing. It is judicial standing. If a judge feels that an act of Congress unconstitutionally interferes with his functions, he could sue Congress.
And, in fact, it even got worse than that because in the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, when they reversed two district court judges, and the district court judges appealed to the Supreme Court, not just the parties, the judges appealed on the grounds that their offices had been interfered with. So I am afraid what hap­pens, if we allow standing to expand like that, is the courts will become the most important branch of government and will umpire disputes everywhere between themselves and the other branches and between the other two branches.
Now, in a case like the kind you are talking about, a private party can usually sue. That is, if Congress passes a statute, and the President fails to carry it out, such as an appropriation or some­thing of that sort, usually a private party can say, wait a minute, I should have gotten that money but the President did not behave correctly, and he has standing. That does not put the courts into the middle of running the other two branches.
There is no preference for the executive branch, in my view, in this matter. It is simply a matter of not bringing all governmental issues into the courts right away as everybody sues everybody else between the branches.
Senator BYRD. This still leaves me troubled, though, Judge Bork. If you take the position that "we ought to renounce, outright, the whole notion of congressional standing." Let us confine this to the point that was being—the thrust of your statement, that point. Notwithstanding the fact that you say that this is not only with congressional standing, but also with the executive and the judicial standing.
It seems to me that to say that if this is recognized in one case, if standing is given, let's say, to Congress, then we open the door for all sorts of cross-currents of suits on the part of the executive, on the part of the Congress and on the part of the judiciary and all of that. It seems to me, most respectfully, that is carrying the matter to an absurd conclusion. You would use the terms reductio ad ab­surdum.
After all, this is the 199th year of the executive and the congres­sional and the judicial branches. Next year will be the 200th year, 1789 will not be the 200th year, that will be the 201st year. That is the first year in the third century. Well, in all of these centuries, I do not think this matter has been decided and I think you pointed that out. But it would seem to me that if there has been no conclu­sion by the Supreme Court, that Congress would have standing, or that either of the other branches would have standing.
There has been no decision by the Court or that they would not have standing. It seems to me that we would have already seen this enaction, one going at the other and certainly, there would have been more opportunities than we have seen, which have been of rather recent vintage, in which the Court would have had the opportunity to say one way or the other on this question. But, let's move on from that just a moment.
You also mentioned private parties. Suppose there is no private party that can show injury and let's take, for example, I do not know—perhaps we should not comment on the matter that is before the Senate right now in which the Nunn-Levin Amendment was voted on, which goes to the interpretation of the ABM Treaty and whether or not it should be the traditional interpretation of the broad. You may or may not have an opportunity to study that case and perhaps make a decision, render one on it.
But, let's put it in this context. Let's say that the Senate ap­proves the ratification of a treaty that provides certain rights and obligations for our government in its embassy abroad and the for­eign country's embassy in our country. And let's say that under the interpretation of that treaty, based on the counsel and advice and testimony of the State Department and the other executive witnesses before the appropriate committee, certain kinds of intelli­gence gathering could be engaged in, within the context of that treaty. And so the Senate, by two-thirds vote, approves the ratifica­tion of the treaty.
Now later, the President decides to reinterpret that treaty, let's say. He says, no, we cannot do this. We will not be able to do this intelligence gathering. Say it is a subsequent President and he in­terprets it differently. And so, the Senate, having been the party under the Constitution which had the role of approving the ratification of the treaty—the Senate does not ratify treaties. The
Senate may approve the ratification of the treaties. The President ratifies treaties, after the Senate gives its approval.
But, let's say that the Senate just does not take umbrage, but that some vital matter to the security interests of this country,
hangs on the action of the President in having reinterpreted that
treaty. Now, why should not the Senate and the House, for that
matter—the House does not have a role in approving the ratification of treaties, but the House has a role in appropriating the monies to carry out the objectives of the treaty.
Let's say the Congress or the Senate—let's narrow it to the Senate—the Senate wants to bring this case. There is no injured
party. I, as a Senator from West Virginia, cannot say I have been
personally injured and so I cannot fulfill that requirement of
injury in fact, but are you, as the judge on the Supreme Court or
on the circuit court in which this might be brought, going to deny
the United States Senate standing to challenge the President's action in reinterpreting that treaty?
Judge BORK. It seems to me, Senator—well there are a number of points to be made in response—but we did not face a case in which
the Senate, as such—I think this case was simply a number of Congressmen and I do not know if there is anything in this opinion about the Senate as such
Senator BYRD. Well, I am going to your statement, "we ought to renounce, outright, the whole notion of congressional standing."
Well, the Senate is one house of the Congress, as we both agree, so
whether it is the Senate or both houses, is the Congress or is the Senate going to be denied standing in this case?
Judge BORK. Frankly, Senator, it depends in part upon a prior statement you made, or it may depend in part upon a prior statement you made. You said you did not think that allowing congres­sional standing led to Presidential standing or judicial standing.
Senator BYRD. I do not think I said that. I am sorry if you inter­preted my saying that.Judge BORK. Well, I am sorry if I did, too. I thought you had said
that my statement that once you allow congressional standing, you
have to allow Presidential standing and judicial standing and so
forth was reductio ad absurdum, which I took to mean that you
thought a line could be drawn between congressional standing and
Senator BYRD. NO, no.
Judge BORK. Well, in that case, it would be—I should also say this. There was no congressional standing or any other kind of governmental standing until 1974 in this circuit. It just did not exist
and the country got along very well with the usual methods of
combat between the executive branch and the legislative branch,
which was Congress withholding appropriations, bargaining in various ways, or passing a statute. For example, in the case you cite,
Congress could pass a statute invalidating that treaty or it could
pass a statute that the President is directed to do this. It would have to override his veto, of course, but you could do that.
Now, Congressional standing, if the kinds of concerns
Senator BYRD. Could I ask you a question? Judge BORK. Certainly.
Senator BYRD. Suppose time does not allow Congress—the security interests of this nation are involved in this intelligence gathering somehow. Time does not allow for the passage of a bill or let's
say that Congress passes that bill and the President vetoes it, says
the heck with Congress. I am going to interpret this the way I want to.
Judge BORK. That is right. You would have to get a two-thirds majority then, to override the President or unless you could threat­en the President with withholding some other thing that he wants.
Senator BYRD. Well, let's say we got the two-thirds majority and overrode him and he said, well, the heck with that. I am still going
to interpret this, this way. Now, I am not an injured party there. I
cannot show injured party, that I have lost anything as a result,
but why shouldn't—if you said, as you said, "we ought to renounce,
outright". That means emphatically, not ifs, ands or buts, without any exceptions, "the whole notion of congressional standing."
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I do not think, from my experience, that you would get any greater speed litigating through a District
Court or Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court, than you would
trying to pass a statute or doing political battle with the President.
And if the horrible consequences that I imagined would flow from
recognizing standing in these cases do not, in fact, flow, then a large part of my objection vanishes.
Senator BYRD. YOU see, if the horrible circumstances do not, in fact, flow Judge BORK. If the horrible consequences, such as Presidents
suing Congress and the Defense Department suing the State Department and so forth and so on, which sometimes looked like it
might happen, and judges suing other judges and judges suing Congress—my concern there is you are making the judiciary the
umpire and central branch of deciding questions, on a daily basis,
between the other branches and between units of the other
branches and so forth. The judiciary really becomes the dominant
branch of government, which is really what I have been trying to avoid.
Senator BYRD. Judge Bork, the judiciary can throw this case out or that case out on its merits. But if this party, the third branch—
the Senate—cannot even get inside the door, who is going to settle this case. And let's say the security interests of this country are involved. You are saying to me, as you said at the time I referred to in using this quotation, you ain't never going to get in this court.
Let's take the Panama Canal treaty, for example. I was the ma­jority leader at the time of that—they are treaties, not treaty, but
let's, for the sake of argument, refer to it as the Panama Canal
treaty—was approved by the Senate. The only way we could get
that treaty approved was to have an amendment, actually two
amendments, one giving the clear rights to the United States to intervene at any time to keep that Canal open, after the year 2000,
and the other was that the United States would go to the head of
the line in the event of war.
Now, let's say—Mr. Reagan was very much opposed to those
treaties, but we note that he has not done anything about negating
them since he has been President. He has lived up to them. But
let's say that he or a future President would say, I am not going to
live up to that and we get into a war and he says no, personally I have never believed in it and I think I am justified in nullifying those treaties and I am not going to insist that our ships go to the head of the line.
Well, now that was one of the few bases on which some Senators, who sit at this table, voted to approve the ratification of that treaty. That was not just a majority. As I have understood you heretofore, you have said that in cases between certain litigants, that the majority will, or the legislature in that instance, should prevail. Here, we have not only the majority will, but the super-majority, which was required under the Constitution.
So, you have a super-majority in the Senate that approved the ratification of that treaty on the understanding that the adminis­tration—everybody interpreted it the same way and the other party interpreted the treaty in the same light and here we are now with a subsequent President who says, I am not going to observe that treaty. It is null and void as far as I am concerned. Now, let's say that security interests of the United States are very much in jeopardy there and the lives of men and women are in danger.
By virtue of the reinterpretation of that subsequent executive, who is going to be able to decide. As I said the other day, who would decide when doctors disagree? You have the executive branch, you have the legislative branch, they are in disagreement here. You had a super-majority in the legislative branch that said that it would be this way. Now, we have got to go to some umpire or referee to determine this in the interests of the United States.
Judge BORK. I certainly see the concerns you have, Senator, and I think they are well-founded concerns. The difficulty I have—it is not a difficulty, I just observe that it has never proved to be neces­sary to go to a court for a reason like that in our history so far. Now, Justice Powell did suggest—although he was not very fond of congressional standing—that if there was an absolute impasse be­tween the President and the Congress, he would allow congression­al standing. I do not know. I have never faced a case like that. But the difficulty is, additionally, that quite aside from any views on standing, in the Goldwater v. Carter case, four of the justices—that is, Justice Rehnquist, Chief Justice Burger, Justice Stewart and Justice Stevens, would have applied the political question doctrine and made the entire dispute, over the termination of the treaty, non-justiciable. If they are right, there are other doctrines that stand in the way and I have not decided those questions. I have no idea. But it may be that the courts are going to have difficulty with suits about that kind of thing, quite aside from any views of mine. But I would just simply observe that for 200 years, we have never found it necessary to have a court decide who is right about a treaty or something of that sort, between the President and the Congress. Maybe there will come a terrible emergency some day and I do not know what the courts will do upon that occasion. But certainly, Senator, I would suggest it should not be a routine matter that the Congress and the President and the judges and the various departments all sue each other in order to find out where everybody stands.
I am not trying to offer you any kind of alliation of my views. I have just never faced a case where there was a great emergency
86-974 0-89-24
and the Congress and the President were at an impasse. I have just
never seen such a case. But if I faced one, I do not know what I would do.
But I certainly, as I said, do not want that to be a routine subject of court litigation because the courts will sit just to decide what are essentially political questions all of the time.
Senator BYRD. Well, we are living in a fast-moving age and who would have known when I graduated from high school that we
would have computers or that we would be talking about laser
beams of SDI or any of these things. And the common law was
made of precedent. There are Senate precedents. There comes a
time when we set a precedent. We would not have precedents if they had not been new in the beginning.
So there may be some unforeseen need and I believe that the possibility of that need arising is probably greater than it was 50
years ago or 100 years ago. And so I think, as Mr. Justice Powell
stated in the case to which you referred, by defining the respective
roles of the two branches in the enactment process, this court will help to preserve, not defeat, the separation of power.
It seems to me that it would become necessary for the court at some point in time to give the Congress the standing because otherwise that case is never going to be decided by anybody and what
you are saying—I say most respectfully—you are saying, let the
Congress and the executive engage in guerilla warfare. Let them engage in guerilla warfare.
If the President wants to take such and such an action, let the Congress reject his next nominee to the Supreme Court or cut off
the money. Congress controls the purse. And confrontation is what,
I think, would ensue. It seems to me that could greatly damage the country.
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, we have, in my opinion, relied upon three different lines of Supreme Court precedent. Maybe the Supreme Court will reconsider those precedents but I consider them to be law.
Senator BYRD. YOU consider them to be law until such time as a subsequent—Plessy v. Ferguson was law but a subsequent Supreme
Court decided that it was wrong in the light of different circum­stances. So we have precedent. You consider that to be law.
Judge BORK. For a Circuit Court Judge
Senator BYRD. Yes.
Judge BORK. It is. A Supreme Court precedent is law to me. Senator BYRD. In other words, the doctrine of stare decisis has no
persuasion with you as a Supreme Court judge; is that what you
are saying?
Judge BORK. NO, sir. I am not saying that. I am saying that a
Supreme Court justice can reconsider a case, as apparently you
want the Supreme Court to reconsider its cases, which really do
not support standing in this thing. But I am saying a circuit judge
certainly cannot reconsider the Supreme Court's cases.
Senator BYRD. Well, the Supreme Court at some point in time
may have to—it may be confronted with this challenge on the part
of the Senate or both Houses and if you are on that court, you will
be confronted with that situation. And suppose the national security interests are very much in the balance and there is no person per se who can say that he has been injured by the act of the Exec­utive.
Judge BORK. Well, I can—I am sorry.
Senator BYRD. But to let that decision stand would give succor and comfort to adversaries, to the Soviet Union, let's say. And it is imperative that somebody decide this, because if somebody does not decide it, it is just going to stay, it is going to remain an impasse.
Now, are you saying to me that you are going to still, 5 years from today, 10 years from today, stand by that statement that you made in the beginning. It was pretty much open and shut; we ought to renounce outright the whole notion of congressional standing.
Judge BORK. Well, I certainly would renounce it outright as far as the regular kind of case is concerned. I have never seen a case and I do not know how I v/ould react under the dire circumstances you state. You know, the Supreme Court—I do not want to get myself into trouble on another subject—but the Supreme Court has said no prior restraints, but it has always kept the possibility of a prior restraints upon newspaper publication in the case of a troop ship sailing out in a war and the paper is going to publish where it is.
So there may be that enormous national emergencies like the troop ship will alter law, but I have never faced a case like that, and to tell you the truth, Senator, I have not thought about it.
Senator BYRD. Well, you have never faced a case like that.
I could say the same thing with regard to a set of circumstances, for the sake of argument, dealing with a Senate amendment or a certain motion. But at some point the Senate will have to decide that and it thereby will set a precedent, or it may overrule some previous precedent.
I think I hear you saying—and I am not attempting to put words in your mouth, you control that side of the table—but it seems to me, I would say, well, I do not know how the Senate would come down in that hypothetical set of circumstances, but I am not going to say never. I am going to say, let's see the circumstances when they come, let's see what they are, and in the light of previous precedents or if there are no precedents, let's let the Senate speak.
In the Senate, if someone raises a constitutional question, the Chair does not rule. The Chair submits that question to the Senate, a constitutional question. So we may have to decide a constitution­al question in the future that we have not decided yet. And today I might maintain a certain position but it would be a little hard for me to say never.
I am hoping I am hearing you say that you have not been con­fronted with a compelling and persuasive set of circumstances yet but the door is still open.
Judge BORK. Senator, let me say this. In the routine kind of case in which the President and the legislative branch get into a squab­ble over whether an appropriations bill is being properly carried out, I think there should not be congressional standing or Presiden­tial standing or judicial standing in that kind of a case and what I am really trying to protect—this is an aspect of my general philosophy of judicial restraint—what I am really trying to protect is to
prevent the courts from stepping into legislative business.
I mean, we will be moving in and deciding what is legislative
business, what is Presidential business and so forth. The legislative
branch ought to be supreme in that area and not the courts. But
you are quite right. If somebody had said—before Near v. Minnesota, the great case involving prior restraints—if somebody had said
there are no prior restraints, it can never be, and then the troop
ship case comes up when the paper is about to publish the details
of a troop ship in the middle of a way, the courts tend to make an exception for that.
Maybe the same thing would happen here if it is the kind of a dire circumstance where failure to act is going to play into the
Soviet Union's hands or something of that sort. I cannot foreclose that possibility.
Senator BYRD. SO it is possible that Congress could be given standing?Judge BORK. Yes. It is possible in that kind of a case. I do not
think in the routine case I would ever agree to it.
Senator BYRD. SO the statement, "we ought to renounce outright the whole notion of congressional standing," you do not subscribe to that 100 percent today?
Judge BORK. Well, I subscribe to it in the regular kind of case. I do not think the courts ought to thrust themselves into legislative
and Presidential business and be deciding it. You give me the extreme case which I never thought of when I wrote that, and I have
to admit that I do not know exactly how that case would look to me if it comes and it is extreme enough.
I am not very happy about the thought that the national security is going down the drain while a court is standing there saying,
well—so, you know, in that kind of a case one might try to fashion a doctrine. In the extreme case, not the regular case.
Senator BYRD. It would be the extreme case I would think that would get to the Court. Judge Bork, I thank you. I have enjoyed the little bit of participation in your hearing that I have been able to take part.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the courtesies extended to me.
I find, Judge Bork, that I leave as I came, undecided, but unlike
you in the matter we have been discussing, I am going to happen to
make a decision one way or the other before the year is out. I hope that I make the right one.
As I said the other day when I was here, I am going to be fair to you. I am going to look at all the testimony and continue to listen
to my constituents, pro and con, and talk with my colleagues, consult with my conscience, pray about it and I hope that in the end I
will do the right thing.
I thank you both.
Judge BORK. Thank you very much.
The CHAIRMAN. I am sure you will, Senator.
Before we move to the next witness, I notice that the former Secretary, Carla Hills is out there. Welcome, Madam Secretary. It is
nice to have you here.
I believe our next presenter or questioner is Senator Grassley
from everyone's favorite State of Iowa, these days.
Senator GRASSLEY. First of all, Mr. Chairman, I am glad you are here in person, even though I would have said this for the record in any event. But I want to thank you for the way you have con­ducted these hearings. You have handled them very well. It has been a very difficult job. You have been under a lot of pressure, but you have handled yourself and the committee extremely well and I want to thank you for that.
Again, Judge Bork, I have got to say good afternoon and compli­ment you to a considerable extent. This is my last round of ques­tioning for this forum. I will have a lot of opportunities to question other people about your qualifications, but I think I want to thank you for your historic appearance before this committee.
I think your answers have been very sincere, most thoughtful, and very complete. They have not only been complete to the ques­tions that I have asked you, but also to my colleagues—I think even to those who had their minds made up two months ago. You have been very thoughtful and sincere and most complete in your answers.
That is to your credit. I respect you for that. I think, too, that there has not really been enough attention given to your family and supporters. I think they need to be commended as well for the grace and extreme patience that they have shown this week. The entire family has my deep respect.
Even though you have been the one who has been on the firingline, I am sure that they felt some of the pressures, even part of the pressure that you have had.
Judge BORK. Indeed they did, Senator.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge, I think I have a theory that helps ex­plain the false and ridiculous notion that you have changed your views here in order to improve your confirmation chances. This is the so-called "confirmation conversion" idea. It occurs to me—and this comes after listening to you for 3 days—that the real problem here is that your views were so distorted for the past 2 months that people actually began to believe everything that they heard and read about you. People actually started believing their own press releases, I believe.
I must say that the way this campaign against you have been conducted is to the discredit of those lobbying against you. In any event, now that you have explained why the campaign against you has been nothing but one misrepresentation after another—you have been accused of changing your mind.
This may be some sort of neat political trick, but I think most people see it for what it is. My deep regret about all of this is that I wish your Washington-lobbyist opponents had spent more time taking the trouble to understand the powerful reasoning behind your philosophy rather than mis-stating the facts in that philoso­phy.
Those are just things that—you know, I am part of the process here and I have got to make up my mind and be responsible for everything I do—but I guess I feel when people have suffered an injustice, that bothers me very much.
Now I want to go on to some of the substantive things that I have asked you about before, and I am going to pick up where we left off yesterday. I asked you about the Finzer v. Barry case, the
D.C. Circuit case upholding the 500 foot limit on public demonstrations in front of embassies in the District of Columbia, and I explained why I thought that the law was over-broad and beyond the
reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on the rights of free speech and assembly. I also said that I was concerned about this statute being selectively enforced.
In fact, last year my Judiciary subcommittee held hearings on the very issue of selective prosecution in the District of Columbia.
We heard testimony, for example, that those arrested for protesting in front of the Soviet Embassy were prosecuted while those arrested in front of the South African Embassy were not prosecuted.
And you said yesterday that selective prosecution was not an issue in Finzer v. Barry and I accept that.
But you also said that the case would have been analyzed differ­ently if there had been such evidence. You even said that the
result might have been different. I would like to have you elabo­rate on that. For instance, what is the test for selective prosecu­tion, or how would your analysis proceed if that had been the case?
Judge BORK. Senator, you catch me without a prepared thought on this subject. I know that selective prosecution, if it is proved,
may invalidate the prosecution, but not the law. It would not
 
change the constitutionality of the law. It would probably invali­date the prosecution.
Selective prosecution is hard to prove unless you have got a mas­sive pattern. Now, maybe there is a massive pattern in these two
cases you mentioned. But I have never faced that. I have never had to decide that case and I do not want to decide it sitting here.
Senator GRASSLEY. NO.
Judge BORK. But if selective prosecution is proved, as I say, it af­fects the prosecution. It would not affect the constitutionality of
the law. Senator GRASSLEY. Well, I did not mean to catch you off guard. I should go on because I can appreciate the situation you might be in. We will drop it at that.
This week we have heard a lot about various speeches you have made. I want to turn to a controversial speech that another Justice
made. This past May, Thurgood Marshall created some public controversy of his own while he was giving a speech on the Bicentennial of the Constitution. Justice Marshall stated at the outset of
that speech that he saw no reason to celebrate the achievements of
our Founders or the system of government they created. And I
don't mean to quarrel with Justice Marshall. I am not here to do
that. I think I understand his position because I did have a chance
to look at the entire speech. But I still found these remarks somewhat troubling, especially coming from one sworn to uphold the Constitution he finds defective.
Are you familiar with Justice Marshall's comments? And, if you are, then I would like to have your reaction to them?
Judge BORK. Well, I should say two things. Senator, I have only seen newspaper accounts of it. The other thing is I don't think one
judge should be commenting upon the views of another judge. Justice Marshall has always been a very good Justice, and when I
argued before him I used to do fairly well. And I like him.
Having said that, let me just say, not by way of controversy, but that I think there is good reason to celebrate the Constitution in its 200th year.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, would you think that maybe the Justice was trying to be just a little provocative? Judge BORK. I don't really want to characterize his motives or in­tentions or anything else.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, I thought maybe I might get you to say that people, even though they are on the Court, can be provocative. You have called yourself provocative, you have been called provoc­ative by others, and you have tried to do that in the various posi­tions you have held; and you have done that well.
Judge BORK. I don't want to characterize anything Justice Mar­shall did. It was obvious, from reading the comments of others, that some people found them provocative.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, I just thought that it might be an illus­tration of the fact that even an associate justice of the Supreme Court can have a different view on whether our Constitution is worth celebrating, and I guess you said you thought it was worth celebrating. So you can have a different point of view. It illustrates that colleagues have different views or philosophies of government; and, obviously, that is certainly true here in the U.S. Senate. Maybe more so than any other body in the world.
Would it be fair to say that the D.C. Circuit on which you now serve has members who don't necessarily share your legal philoso­phy or your views about what you think the proper role of the courts happens to be?
Judge BORK. That would be fair to say, Senator.
Senator GRASSLEY. HOW would you characterize your personal or professional relationship with your colleagues? Judge BORK. They have always been highly civil and friendly. Senator GRASSLEY. Could you repeat, please? Judge BORK. I say they have always—our relationships have
always been highly friendly, civil, good. I think we say, sometimes, harder things about each other in print than we ever do in person. In fact, our meetings are quite congenial and we, you know, see each other at various social functions from time to time.
Senator GRASSLEY. I would like to follow up, then, with a ques­tion in the area that touches on collegiality and open-mindedness. You have testified that you have had occasions where you changed your view of a case on the court of appeals after having had a chance to hear oral arguments by the attorneys in the case, is that correct?
Judge BORK. That is correct.
Senator GRASSLEY. About how many times has that happened?
Judge BORK. Oh. I really don't know, Senator. I will tell you almost routinely, if I didn t change sides. I don't always change sides. I don't mean that. But almost routinely my perspective on the case changes and the way I deal with it changes after oral ar­gument; and sometimes, not infrequently—I can't tell you how fre­quently—my decision about who should win changes after oral ar­gument. Oral argument is extremely valuable to a judge.
Senator GRASSLEY. Okay. In other words, you might reach one tentative conclusion about the proper outcome of a case after reading the legal briefs, and then after hearing the lawyers make their
case during oral argument, you might be persuaded by better reasoning; is that how it might happen? Judge BORK. Yes; or something comes up that suggests the question to me, and you ask the question and you get an answer you
didn't quite expect, and you begin to change your view of the case. Senator GRASSLEY. Have you ever had an occasion to change your
view of a case after you actually wrote the initial panel opinion;
say, when the case was reheard by the entire DC Circuit? Judge BORK. Well, I have once changed my view of a case that
came out the same way by the panel. I mean, the result, who won,
was the same but the rationale changed. I once decided a case, got
a petition for rehearing and, after a lot of exchange, granted it, and
the panel changed its mind, 2 to 1. But then we reheard the case
en bane, and the en bane court sustained the panel. But I changed
my mind between two panel opinions. More recently, I wrote an opinion joined by Judge Edwards, with
Judge Skelly Wright dissenting, upholding an EPA position against
a public interest law firm—public interest group. Senator GRASSLEY. Was that in National Resources Defense Council v. EPA?
Judge BORK. Yes; National Resources Defense Council v. EPA. And there was a petition for rehearing, and then it was reheard en
bane. It was a little odd, because none of us had really—I think the
National Resources Defense Council got up and disavowed the dissent in their favor by Judge Wright, and then the EPA got up and
disavowed my opinion in their favor, so we had to start all over
again.But I asked a question and got a very unexpected answer and
came down the other way, voting for the—remanding the case, in
effect, voting against EPA this time. I got a unanimous en bane
court on that one. Senator GRASSLEY. Well, there has been some publicity in the
papers about your participation in that case, and I would think
that that would speak well of your capacity and willingness to
rethink positions, contrary to those who have criticized you as
being too rigid. This is not out of expediency, but in the spirit of
scholarly give and take and honest debate with your colleagues. Judge BORK. That is what the law is all about. Senator GRASSLEY. But I think my colleagues here on the committee, and eventually the whole Senate, ought to think of that as
one example. And not the only example, probably, because you said
there were several. In fact, "not infrequently" was the term you
used, where there had been arguments given after you had had a
chance to study the legal briefs and you changed your mind. Judge BORK. Um-hum. Senator GRASSLEY. SO you aren't in cement. Judge BORK. By no means. Senator GRASSLEY. When citizens come before courts in America,
they don't want a guarantee that they are going to win. But they
do deserve no less than a judge who has an open mind, one who is
willing to hear them out. Time and again I think you have shown
this ability to rethink positions in a rigorous and intellectually
honest way. My only regret is that all those in the chorus of opposition don't have the same skill. I wish these folks had some of the same courage you have shown.
If they had it, they would have realized by now that you are pre­cisely the kind of thinker that we ought to have on the Supreme Court of the United States. They ought to be looking at you from that standpoint. I hope that, after a week of you being here, people will have a chance to study the hearing record and give consider­ation to that.
Judge Bork, we haven't had many questions about criminal law. And maybe, of course, that is because there really is no Washing­ton lobby that is pro criminal. But nevertheless
The CHAIRMAN. There is a lot of lobbies that will be glad to hear you say that, Senator. They will remind you of that statement be­cause there are some who have been branded that way. I think you are right. I agree with you, but I am just suggesting that.
Senator GRASSLEY. They are lucky I said it instead of Senator Simpson.
The CHAIRMAN. That is right.
Senator GRASSLEY. Judge Bork, you have spoken out earlier today against expansive interpretations of procedural rights that would sometimes allow criminals to escape justice. I agree with you, but I am interested in your rationale.
Could you explain some of the dangers inherent in what you sometimes refer to as the "sporting theory of justice," or did you refer to that as the "game theory of justice ?
Judge BORK. I don't recall that I did, Senator, but I am sure there is a tape from someplace where I may have said that. I don't recall saying it.
Senator GRASSLEY. NO. I should not credit you with those words. But that is sometimes what it is called.
Judge BORK. Well, I haven't had great experience with criminal law. I have argued some criminal law cases as Solicitor General in the Supreme Court. I have decided some criminal law cases in the DC Circuit. But I am by no means an authority on criminal law, and I must say I really can't do much better than to say that the question of resolving society's legitimate interests and the accused's legitimate rights is very difficult. But in all cases I think the ac­cused must be assured a completely fair trial, and that is about as far as I can go. That is just a general philosophy. I am sure it is— with more experience with the field, I am sure I could elaborate more.
Senator GRASSLEY. Well, could you at least explain for us the rea­soning behind your vote in United States v. Brown, in which you joined in overturning the conviction of nine defendants on a number of serious criminal charges?
Judge BORK. Yes. That was an enormous prosecution and trial, but—I mean, many charges and defendants. But it turned out that a—it was a RICO—Racketeering, how is that? It was a Racketeer­ing Act charge. But it turned out that one witness had sent out word that he couldn't sit or something of that sort—not witness, I am sorry. A juror had sent out word that he couldn't decide the case, and the judge questioned him.
First, he complained about the statute. He didn't like the statute. But then he said something that we thought had to be—the full
panel we sat on—thought had to be taken as a statement that he
didn't like the evidence, either. Well, it was a very awkward moment for the trial judge. He did
the best he could; finally, he excused the juror. But we thought
that there was too much chance, given what the juror had said,
that a juror who did not accept the Government's view of the facts
had been excused from the jury, and therefore the defendant was
denied a trial by 12 jurors. And we reversed for that reason. We didn't reverse, we remanded for a new trial. We didn't do
anything else. But it looked very much as if—you could not say for
sure that a juror who had decided for innocence hadn't been excused. The trial judge didn't mean to do that, but that is what the
transcript gave theimpression. Senator GRASSLEY. Well, based on your action in that case, would
it be fair to say that you won't hesitate to overturn a conviction if
constitutional rights are violated? Judge BORK. Well, that is right. That is right. No, I—statutory or
constitutional right has to be respected and the persons have to get
a fair trial, and get a chance at a juror—12 jurors in case one of
them wants to acquit. Senator GRASSLEY. The next question I am going to ask is prob­ably more important to a non-lawyer like me than it would be to
people here who have studied the law to a great extent. You have
had a chance during this hearing to discuss many Supreme Court
cases and make references to Supreme Court Justices of the past,
even some of the present. I don't know whether you have had
much of a chance to give any thought to something like this, but
could you tell me which Justices, past and/or present, that you
hold in highest regard and which you would like to pattern yourself after and why? Judge BORK. Well, I think I had better stay away from contemporary Justices, Senator. Senator GRASSLEY. Okay. Judge BORK. And as I think back Senator GRASSLEY. Let me say there is not a United States Senator who hasn't thought of how he or she compares to the 1,750 Senators who have served in this great body. So I am asking you in
that same vein. Judge BORK. Well, of the Justices I have admired in the past, I think of Taft. Now, of course, there is the great Chief Justice John
Marshall, but he had a unique situation he was in when the Court
was starting off. And then there was—William Howard Taft I
think is a better judge, a better Justice and deserves a better
memory than he has, because he used to work carefully with textual materials and historical materials to try to give a very balanced
decision about constitutional matters. He also once held the chair that I later held at Yale, so I have to
give him credit for that. He was also Solicitor General and circuit
judge. Those were his most important positions.
Charles Evans Hughes I always thought was very good. Robert
Jackson I liked. Of course, there are the great ones; you know,
Holmes, whom I have been criticizing here, but he is clearly a
great Justice. I mean, I criticized him on one case, which I have
been arguing about. But he was clearly a great Justice. Robert Jackson I thought was good. There are a lot of them.
Senator GRASSLEY. What is there about these predecessors that you would like to pattern yourself after? What is there about them?
Judge BORK. Well, pretty much they are people of dispassionate temperament, they make a serious attempt to locate the law and locate the case they are looking at within the law, and are highly intelligent in doing that, and highly sophisticated in doing that.
By and large, they are people who are practitioners of what we have been calling judicial restraint. And Felix Frankfurter I should add to that list, who was very good in a number of cases. In many, most cases.
Senator GRASSLEY. I appreciate that very much. And, Mr. Chair­man, this will be my last question.
Chief Justice Burger, while he was Chief Justice, spoke out on the issues of judicial administration, lawyer advertising, frivolous lawsuits, and the quality of lawyers admitted to the bar. I would like to have your opinion in each of those three areas.
Judge BORK. Well, I, starting with the last, I don't think—I think the quality of lawyers being admitted to the bar is quite high. I think there is a problem sometimes with trial lawyers because a trial lawyer really needs a lot of experience and a lot of knowledge of technical nuances, how to get evidence introduced and so forth, and maybe there ought to be a little additional training for trial lawyers, you know. But the quality of lawyers generally I think is quite high.
I'm sorry, the other one was judicial administration and—oh, frivolous lawsuits. Senator GRASSLEY. Yes. Frivolous lawsuits and lawyer advertis­ing.
Judge BORK. Well, lawyer advertising, I confess, doesn't bother me. Advertising for other products is a way of bringing information to consumers and making them aware of a range of choice. It can also be deceptive. I assume deceptive advertising by a lawyer could be punished.
But I don't see why—one of the problems with a lot of the citi­zenry, generally they have, is that they don't know where to turn when they have a legal problem, and some of these new mass case law firms I think do a good service in areas of routine wills, rou­tine real estate transactions, and so forth. They provide services at a low price and I think, as I understand it, they are pretty good at it, and I think that their existence and what they offer ought to be made known.
In addition to that, the commercial speech aspect of the first amendment seems to say that lawyer advertising cannot be prohib­ited. But, as a policy matter, I am not really troubled by it.
And judicial administration, the courts at all levels are suffering from enormous overload, and I think we are going to have to re­think rearrangements of courts and tribunals and jurisdictions in order to cope with that problem. It is an enormous problem and it takes a long time to talk about it.
Senator GRASSLEY. Did I miss the point on frivolous lawsuits?
Judge BORK. Oh, frivolous lawsuits, I am sorry. Yes, there are a lot of those in the system, and I don't really know how to deal with them. I mean, somebody has to address that problem because they take up, you know—they take up a lot of time and money for the adversary who has to defend it even if it is frivolous, and they take up a lot of time and energy from courts that could be better spent on more serious matters. But it is a tough problem, how to weed out the frivolous from the one that maybe looks a little odd but turns out not to be frivolous.
It is a serious problem and I hope the bar, and the judiciary, and perhaps the Congress can deal with it, and find mechanisms to deal with it.
Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you very much for answering my three rounds of questions. I appreciate it very much. I would like to re­serve my time.
The CHAIRMAN. YOU need not reserve it. Any Senator who wishes to ask questions after everyone else has, we are going to let Sena­tors have an opportunity to do that, and we are going to stay here. So you need not reserve it, I assure you, if you wish to ask ques­tions.
Judge, I am going to ask my round of questions now, and then we will break for a few minutes, unless you would rather break now.
Judge BORK. NO, that is fine.
The CHAIRMAN. Judge, I am going to make a statement at the outset with my friend from Wyoming here, and he sure has been a friend, and I do not say that lightly. But I am going to disagree with him on something here.
I want to, I think, put this in a slightly different perspective, and I will just give you my perspective on this, and then I have several questions.
It is true that there are interest groups that are characterizing you in ways that you have never heard me characterize you, and you never will hear me characterize you.
I heard one interest group referred to you as a Neanderthal. I think that is preposterous, and I think it is undignified, and I think it is untrue. But just so we all understand how this works, one of the reasons maybe some of the groups are upset is because of other people.
See, it's not only your adversaries but your friends who are help­ing you, to paraphrase my friend from Wyoming.
Jerry Falwell said, and I quote: "We are standing at the edge of history." This is on August 4th. "Our efforts have always been stalled at the door of the Supreme Court and Bork's nomination will be our last chance to influence this most important body."
Most people, most Americans, although they have respect for Jerry Falwell, do not doubt what Jerry Falwell's political procliv­ities are.
Then, a statement in the "Christian Voice" on July 27th, after you were named, the following appeared: Ensure conservative America, even after President Reagan leaves the White House in 1988. We have a prime opportunity to give the Supreme Court its first conservative majority since 1930. Did you realize that Justice Powell was the deciding vote in winning the last eight pro-abortion cases brought by the Supreme Court, by the American Civil Liberties Union.
There probably was a hiss when that was said. "Confirming Judge Bork would change all of this." Let me just read, last, "Did you realize"—this is a Christian Voice broadcast—"Did you realize that Justice Powell was the deciding vote in winning the last eight pro-abortion cases brought by the Supreme Court, by the American Civil Liberties Union. Confirming Judge Bork would change all that."
There's many more quotes. I am not asking you to associate with that at all. I know you do not, either end. But the point is that this thing feeds off itself.
Judge BORK. Oh, sure, sure. I understand. The people on both sides of the issue are purporting to know what I am going to do and they do not, and I do not know the Reverend Falwell.
The CHAIRMAN. I was not suggesting you do, and that is what this hearing is all about. Our debate is, at least yours and mine so far, to the extent we have had a debate—not a debate so much— but our differences, and I think they exist—they are about funda­mental rights and whether or not they are found under the Consti­tution, within the Constitution.
And Judge, one of the reasons why some people on this panel have raised the issue about consistency is that—a little bit "you're darned if you do, and you're darned if you don't." But your admis­sions, or, your admissions may be the wrong word—it's too strong. Your assertions of change in positions that you have had—for ex­ample—the change in the 1964 Civil Rights Act, you concluded later was a good thing.
And concluded that your 1971 view was better than the view ex­pressed in the 1968 "Fortune" article.
Those, in the past at least, prior to the changes, have in the minds of some of us resulted in an original view that you had, that some of us find—and even you find—one you no longer accept.
For example, on freedom of speech. That at least the provocative statement was enough to cause some of us—you have pulled away from that bright line you tried to draw, at least theoretically—to get upset. At least it got me upset.
And in the course of these hearings, there have been some—I would say they are close to revelations—regarding your views on the equal protection clause, underlying equal protection, the advo­cacy of civil disobedience under the first amendment, and now there seems to some of us a change in your view on precedent.
I am not doubting you changed, but it seems as though you have. And all this leads me to believe that as we debate this 200-year-old document, and we are still on the same fundamental debate, that is, the role of individuals and the rights of individuals relative to the majority and to government generally.
And you have indicated you will apply your underlying princi­ples in concluding how to vote on cases, and some of us—I, for one—think that the underlying principles are principles that will— not because there is any malevolence on your part, not because you personally believe the conclusions should be what it would be— force you to conclusions with which I have strong disagreements.
The tension between the individual and the government has been a debate that has focused the attention of every generation of Americans for 200 years, and each generation, as I see it, has with the exception of the brief period in the Lochner era, has expanded those rights, those individual rights relative to the Government, relative to economic power.
And it seems to me that that battle is going to continue, and that the Court will have to play a very pivotal role as to whether or not the Constitution embraces the expansion, the continued expansion of individual rights.
And I want a Court that continues to mature in the way in which I think society is maturing. Society now recognizes, and the Court protects—and I am sure you will agree it should—my 6-year­old daughter's right to think about being President of the United States, which was a preposterous notion 50, 70, 100 years ago.
She has as much right to think about that as she grows up as my two sons do. Our society recognizes that in our complex world there are almost as many divorced people as there are married people, and maybe we should evolve the right, the constitutional marital right, the constitutional right of a parent, whether married or not, to see their child.
The Court protects art, for no other reason than it is art. No other reason. Just because it ennobles us. It raises us up. It makes us laugh. It makes us cry. It has no relationship to anything else. Just simply because it is there.
Just simply because it makes us feel good. Simply because it is provocative, even though it has no relationship to any political con­text, no relationship to political speech or political discourse.
And Judge, with notable exceptions, at least in the first instance, based on your writings, you and I have ended up at a different point, a different spot. And I would like to go back now, and I say that by way of trying to explain why I think some people—and I, from reading the press, although I have tried not to do that too much the last 2 days—reading the press, there is this question raised about whether you have flipped or changed, or moved.
And so I do not ask this, and I hope you take me at my word. I do not ask these questions that I am about to ask—none of them are going to be sharp questions—I do not ask them for any other reason than trying to make sure I am able to mesh what has been said.
So if you will give me a few minutes here, and I am going to give you all the time in the world to respond.
I would like to start with—I realize we have been over it several times—the equal protection clause. Now, the equal protection clause, as the Court has looked at it in the recent past—and by that, I mean the last generation or so; actually, the last 60, 80, maybe 90 years—has gone through mild, at least—I think we would acknowledge—changes.
Now, you have stated—and I think you are right—that the core principle in the equal protection clause, the 14th amendment, was race; that was the core principle. Yet, there are various tests that have grown up. One was, as we spoke about, and Senator Specter spoke at length about, and Senator DeConcini, the strict scrutiny test, which basically says in matters of race, you had better have
an overwhelming reason to make a distinction. And I am not using,
as my son would say, "lawyers' language" here; I am just trying to
make it as colloquial but accurate as I can, so that I understand it as well as everyone else.
Then the Court in the Seventies began to apply an intermediate scrutiny test. That fell somewhere between strict scrutiny and the
rational basis test. The rational basis test is a lot looser, as we both
acknowledged, so that if in fact a legislative body had any rational
basis to make the distinction that was being made, then the Court
would usually uphold it. But the Court started to play around.
They wanted to expand, as I view it, expand rights. And they
began to apply this intermediate scrutiny test—not as tough as strict scrutiny, but not as easy as the rational basis test.
And then Justice Stevens said he did not like all these catego­ries. He said there should be one test, basically—the reasonableness test.
Now, it seems to me—although I do not take issue with Justice Stevens coming up with that—that that is almost a totally subjective test; that reasonableness—my dear mother, God bless her—
and I hope she was not taking the quote from anyone else—and she
probably did—"What is one man's meat is another man's poison," or something like that—she gets them mixed up, like I do.
Judge BORK. Yes, yes.
The CHAIRMAN. SO reasonableness to Senator Specter may not be reasonableness to me, and reasonableness to me assuredly would
probably not be reasonableness to Senator Humphrey because we disagree so much on things.
But it is very subjective, as I read it. And yesterday, you said—I am flipping, changing, a little bit here now, because I am trying to
figure it out—you said, when there was a lot of questioning about
your article on neutral principles, which is now on the best seller
list, you said the part that did not make much sense anymore—the
part that should not be looked to so much anymore—is the second half. It was basically two halves.
Judge BORK. Oh, the second half is all right, Senator. I did not mean to disavow it. The CHAIRMAN. Oh, no, no, no. I did not mean that. The second
half is where you try to draw a bright line. But the first half, you
said—and I will not go through all the quotes; you have said it as
late as 1986 and 1987—let us just stick with the first half of that article.
Now, you say—and I think, to your credit, you are one of the few people of late who has tried to come up with a constitutional construct. Some of the law and economics folks have done the same;
your colleagues, Mr. Posner, and Mr. Easterbrook have attempted
it, and Mr. Winter, and others. But you say—and I quote—"But
this resolution of the dilemma"—the Madisonian dilemma you talk
about with great eloquence—"imposes a severe requirement upon
the Court, for it follows the Court's power is legitimate only if it
has and can demonstrate in reasoned opinions that it has a valid
theory, derived from the Constitution, of respective spheres of majority and minority freedom. It does not have such a theory, but
merely imposes its own value choice, or worse, if it pretends to
have a theory, but actually follows its own predilections, the Court
violates the proposition of the Madisonian model that alone justifies its power, and then necessarily, abets the tyranny either of the majority or the minority." Now, that is a very eloquent and, I think, compelling, statement.
I can think of no test that would more violate the principle that
you set out here than the reasonableness test, which is totally subjective. I think we both have to acknowledge that a judge—and I
am not considering you conservative, liberal—a judge can go anywhere he or she wants under that test. What is reasonable to me
may be totally unreasonable to Senator Humphrey, and what is totally unreasonable to him may be reasonable to me. Now, what I am trying to figure out is how you could possibly
adopt such a subjective test as Justice Stevens has and particularly
since there is nothing that I have found in any of your prior writings, any of your prior speeches, anything you have ever said prior
to this hearing starting, that you adopted the Stevens standard. That is the question. Judge BORK. Okay. Let us go into—it is going to take a little
while. The CHAIRMAN. Please, take the time you need. Judge BORK. I can think of no test that is perhaps more subjective than a reasonable basis test than the intermediate scrutiny
test that the Supreme Court now uses. As a matter of fact, I remember I was once arguing a case in the Supreme Court, and
somebody said what about strict scrutiny. And I said, well, if you
say strict scrutiny, the case is over. And one of the other Justices
said that is right, it is a conclusory term; we say strict scrutiny
when we intend to strike it down. In the past, they have said rationality when they intend to let it
stand up. Intermediate scrutiny—nobody quite knows what that means. It goes all over the place. It is highly subjective. And I do not think the reasonable basis test is that subject, but one could argue about which one is more subjective. But unless you are going to compelling all the way, or unless you are going to let it stand all the way, there is an element of subjectivity that cannot be avoided. The CHAIRMAN. I agree, but why, then, based on neutral princi­ples, why didn't you stick with the less subjective standard, which we all thought you had? You understand why guys like me, after reading, I think, all you have written, would logically conclude, as I think Senator Specter did in the beginning, logically conclude that your test in applying the—when you said, for example, that activ­ism tends to trivialize the Constitution, for example, once the Court expands the equal protection clause beyond the subject of race,
standards for demanding equality are blurred, et cetera Judge BORK. Where is that? The CHAIRMAN. I am sorry. We have quoted so many times—the 1974 Mayflower speech; and then you did a similar thing at the—
that was when you were Solicitor General. Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. The only point I am making, and then I will
stop—you see, what confuses us is that obviously—I say obvious-
ly—I believe, obviously, the rational basis test is less subjective
than the reasonableness test.
And we all thought—correct me if I am wrong, Senators Specter and DeConcini—I think we all thought that you applied and thought—you did not like any of it.
Judge BORK. I do not like the multi-tier, group-by-group ap­proach.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, I understand that. But doesn't it make sense in line with neutral principles and in keeping judges from wandering over the landscape to have the most objective test you can; and isn't the rational basis test more objective?
Judge BORK. NO. The rational basis test, if it is the lowest of the three tiers
The CHAIRMAN. Yes.
Judge BORK. That is more objective only in the sense that it allows everything to be done; I mean, it just does not strike any laws down. The CHAIRMAN. That is right, but isn't that—let me stick with that, now—isn't the embodiment of what you write
Judge BORK. NO.
The CHAIRMAN. That majorities—that the Madison­ian principle, in fact, says, as you read, as I read what you have said about it, the Madisonian dilemma is resolved by you by saying that, look, the only circumstances in which minorities—a minority; I do not mean that in terms of race—a minority—have rights is when—and you have said this in your articles, and I will para­phrase, I will not go and find the quote—is when those rights are delegated to them by the majority. And the Constitution, really, isn't that a gathering of the majority to enshrine in the Constitu­tion what rights minorities will have; and that is why you have to look at the textual context of it, right?
Judge BORK. That is right. The Constitution was a great—the Bill of Rights, at least—was a great moment in which a super ma­jority passed a self-denying law.
The CHAIRMAN. Right. Judge BORK. And that self-denying law has now been spread from the federal government to the State governments. The CHAIRMAN. NOW, let me stop you there, too. You see, there is the crux of your and my disagreement.
Judge BORK. But I want to get back to this question of the
The CHAIRMAN. NO, no, I know—I will let you get back to it, but I want to make this point. The crux of our disagreement is I do not believe they were self-denying. That is why I think the 9th amend­ment meant something.
You see, I think that—and I want my friend from Wyoming to understand why I am having a disagreement here—that I think that the majority did not grant anything. What the majority did was acknowledge some of those rights that we automatically had that predated the Constitution, predated anything, predated the Declaration of Independence.
Now, back to this point. I understand you. I just want you to un­derstand why we do not understand what appears to us to be a change on your part.
Judge BORK. Well, can I address this question of that?
The CHAIRMAN. Yes, please.
Judge BORK. As we have sat here, I have discussed with you some things where I have changed my mind, such as the bright line test applied to explicitly political speech. I have also said to you that there are areas where I have not changed my mind, and that is where we get into discussions, because you do not like the fact that I have not changed my mind, but I have not.
There are also areas where I have said I haven't changed my mind, or else I haven't thought about it again and maybe I would think the same thing I said before if I thought about it again—I don't know. But I accept it as settled law as a judge.
Now, to accept it as settled law as a judge is not to change your mind.
The CHAIRMAN. IS this one of those areas?
Judge BORK. Which?
The CHAIRMAN. Equal protection clause?
Judge BORK. Yes, let me go to that, the equal protection clause, because I think it's important to understand where you get. The Court started off with this group-by-group business—some groups don't qualify, others do. I think that's
The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me, don't qualify under certain tests?
Judge BORK. TO be covered.
The CHAIRMAN. TO be covered by certain tests.
Judge BORK. Yes, they get at most a rationality test. And the ra­tionality test, as I pointed out in this The CHAIRMAN. They all get covered, just in different ways, right?
Judge BORK. Well, yes, but this rationality test led them to say that women couldn't be licensed as bartenders unless they are re­lated to a male proprietor, and so forth. It just isn't much of a test. But, passing that, I think the Court got off on the wrong foot be­cause—and we are going into an arcane area again—perhaps be­cause they adopted the approach of what is known as Footnote 4 in the Carolene Products case, which says we must protect discrete and insular minorities. And that was minorities who are small, don't have much contact or connection with the rest of the society, and aren't big enough to vote.
If you approach the equal protection clause in that way, I take it women would not be covered, because women are not a discrete and insular minority.
The CHAIRMAN. Because they can vote.
Judge BORK. Women would not be covered if you are talking about discrete and insular minorities. But I think this group-by­group approach, each group with a different standard, intermedi­ate, etcetera, is really intellectually incoherent. And let me pause right here and say—because I forget to mention it—the subjectivity of a reasonable-basis approach is no greater than much of constitu­tional law, and all the doctrine of neutral principles means, is not that we have an automatic rule; it means that the judge should honestly say, if I decide this case on these criteria, then I must decide any other case that has the same criteria the same way.
The CHAIRMAN. That's why it is so subjective, Judge, because in the 14th amendment you are not applying all cases by the same rule.
Judge BORK. No, I know—I am describing to you what the theory of neutral principles, as laid down by Herbert Wechsler, was, which I was trying to follow in this article.
The CHAIRMAN. YOU moved on a little bit from there.
Judge BORK. What?
The CHAIRMAN. I said you moved on from
Judge BORK. He was talking about application, and I said why shouldn't you use it in definition and in derivation. The CHAIRMAN. That's right. Judge BORK. But this group-by-group approach, in which some
groups get really no protection because they call it "rationality" and away we go, I think is wrong, because a lot of groups that are now covered in one way or another would never be covered if you went back to what they were aiming at.
The CHAIRMAN. Which is they were aiming only at race, right?
Judge BORK. Well, that was sure the core of it, but let me tell you this, if you are doing an original-understanding approach to the Constitution, the surest guide, the first guide, the first thing you turn to, is the text, and the text of this thing says "nor shall any person be denied equal protection of the laws." That I think means that you don't say maybe they were thinking about blacks, former slaves, and so forth, but they stated a principle that's broad­er. And we'll come to it in a minute—I'm not so sure they were thinking about that—maybe, I don't know. The language and the history suggest that this group-by-group approach is misguided.
Now, yesterday I think I mentioned Congressman Bingham who was the drafter of the equal protection clause, and when he was speaking to the Congress in support of it he said "Is it not essential to the unity of the government and the unity of the people that all persons, whether citizens or strangers within this land, shall have equal protection in every state?" And then there was Senator Howard, a member of the committee that drafted the 14th amend­ment, and its manager on the floor, on the Senate floor, and he said "The equal protection clause abolishes all class legislation in the states and does away with the injustice of subjecting one caste of persons to a code not applicable to another."
So my point is I think it's more faithful to the language, and at least to what Senator Howard and Congressman Bingham said, to say, look, this thing applies to all people, it applies to any person; there is no reason to say this group gets this scrutiny, this group gets this scrutiny; it is much easier to say we are going to ask whether a distinction made between persons is a reasonable way to accomplish a valid legislative purpose. Now, that means that the law is going to change over time, that is, understanding of reason­ableness changes over time in the society. But that is true of our understanding
The CHAIRMAN. DO you keep strict scrutiny in your test? Judge BORK. YOU get the same result as strict scrutiny, but you don't start with strict, intermediate, and The CHAIRMAN. SO for you there is only one test, not strict, but just reasonable. Judge BORK. That is right. That is what Justice Stevens suggest­ed I think with a great deal of merit.
The CHAIRMAN. Let me offer an alternative, not that I expect you to accept it, but again so we understand our differences.
It seems to me under the neutral principles article, and how you have articulated it in many other fora, you would not come to the conclusion you did for the following reason. You would conclude that all men, if you are not going to make distinctions among class­es of persons, that they would all be viewed as protected.
Judge BORK. They are.
The CHAIRMAN. Wait a minute—in the same way that did not allow for the legislative bodies to make distinctions, a little bit like the ERA.
Judge BORK. Not allow legislative bodies to make any distinc­tions?
The CHAIRMAN. Correct. If you are going to move the route of ap­plying neutral principles, you either do it that way or you begin to make classifications. But to end up with a reasonableness test, it seems to me that you may very well find, although you state it can't, now—you may find that there are distinctions being made further down the road on reasonableness based upon alienage.
Judge BORK. Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. Based upon being handicapped. Based upon maybe even race, if you abandon the strict scrutiny test. Judge BORK. Oh, no, no, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. Why couldn't you? Judge BORK. Because The CHAIRMAN. What would happen if it were concluded under
your rationale, as related to the propensity to communicate dis­ease, that genetically one race carried the gene more than another race and a court came along and made that distinction—I mean, a legislative body made the distinction.
Judge BORK. And what do they do?
The CHAIRMAN. Well, they decide that, for example, there is going to be automatic testing for one group of people, which, by the way, worries a lot of people. You see, when I talked to you before about the future, it's not very far off the horizon that if we don't get one disease under control, you may find legislative bodies taking whole classes of people based upon propensity of conduct to say we are going to put you in a certain category, we are going to demand mandatory testing for you.
Judge BORK. I am not going to try to decide cases of the future as The CHAIRMAN. NO, no, I just want you to continue to philoso­phize a little.
Judge BORK. Well, I am talking about—for example, it is now the settled consensus that there is no basis for distinguishing between racial groups.
The CHAIRMAN. But it's settled consensus that they make that judgment based on strict scrutiny. You are abandoning that test.
Judge BORK. There is no reasonable basis to make a distinction
between the races, if you will, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. Well, I happen to agree with you, but you aban­don the test they use. Judge BORK. Justice Stevens has abandoned it and arrived at all the same results.
The CHAIRMAN. When did you adopt Justice Stevens' view? Judge BORK. I don't know, I The CHAIRMAN. I never heard it until this Judge BORK. Well, I haven't been writing about the equal protection clause. The CHAIRMAN. I know—not necessarily in your writings; I mean, have you ever adopted it anywhere before? I mean, I've
never heard it before. Judge BORK. It's not in writing, but, you know, we've discussed all these cases in class. And when I first started talking about it, I
was saying they ought to give the rationality test some teeth, and
decide these cases differently. That in a way was starting into a
reasonable-basis test, because a lot of these cases I discuss here—on
page 12 of my Indiana article, Kotch v. Board of River Port Pilots—
you can't get a license unless you are related to a river boat pilot;
Goesaert v. Cleary—a woman can't get a license as a bartender
unless she's the wife or the daughter of a male owner; Levy v. Louisiana, and so forth—there are all kinds of cases that that classification system just hasn't protected anybody. The CHAIRMAN. Concluding on that same page 12, you said: "There is no principled way in way anyone can define the spheres
in which liberty is required and the spheres in which equity is required. These are matters of morality, of judgment, of prudence.
They belong therefore in the political community. In the fullest
sense, they are political questions." Judge BORK. That's right. And I'm talking about Professor
Wechsler's remark about Justice Frankfurter in cases where they
had to decide about a political question, and therefore wouldn't, or
where they decided about liberty and equality, and therefore
wouldn't. If you use concepts like that, you are into the question of
morality and prudence and so forth. What I'm trying to say is The CHAIRMAN. Aren't we into that with "reasonableness"? Judge BORK. What you are going to do is look at this thing and
say—you know, we discussed Reed v. Reed in which a statute said
that a man had to be preferred to a woman as an administrator of
an estate. Nobody can think of a reason for that; it's an outmoded
stereotype.We discussed the Cleburne case, I think using the reasonable-
basis test. Justice Stevens struck down a law that disadvantaged
retarded people.The CHAIRMAN. But how about if we get into cases that are more likely to occur? I am not asking for your judgment. We get in a
case where we say it's not reasonable for the army to make a distinction between whether or not a woman can fly an F-15 and a
man can fly an F-15. I'm sure, I guarantee you there are people in
this body who will say that's a very reasonable distinction, women
shouldn't be up there flying those F-15's. Judge BORK. That's right, you are going to have to decide cases like that, and there is going to be evidence about whether a certain
kind of strength is required, biological function, and so forth. You
know, that can't be avoided. If you are going to get into this, you
get into the same thing with intermediate scrutiny; you don't get
away from anything with intermediate scrutiny—you are into the
same business. The CHAIRMAN. But what you are doing when you move off—and I will move off this subject now—but when you move off the ration-
al-basis test, at least in the rational-basis test, although I admit—I
think the reason the Court went to intermediate scrutiny is because the rational-basis test didn't get them where they wanted to
go.
Judge BORK. That's right.The CHAIRMAN. They wanted to reach out. And so the rational-
basis test was more restrictive in fact, and that's why they went to
intermediate scrutiny. Now, you are coming to reasonableness, and
all of us thought, based on your writings, you would be at intermediate scrutiny, and we are quite frankly wondering whether or not,
because your whole—everything you have written about this clause
is, one, you'd like to see it viewed more restrictively. Judge BORK. NO, no, I said that if you are going to use this
group-by-group approach, once you get beyond race and race-like
things, then you are making political choices about which group
gets which scrutiny.The CHAIRMAN. SO a business does not get any more scrutiny, the
chemical industry gets no more scrutiny than a woman? Judge BORK. NO, no. I would think—you know, I am now launching into areas where I have never worked. The CHAIRMAN. We are accustomed to that up here; it's our job. Judge BORK. I know, but I don't want to start making statements The CHAIRMAN. YOU don't want to be a Senator. Judge BORK. That are going to haunt me. But in economic rights the Court has generally, I think, supposed that interest group politics was at work and they didn't examine it too closely. Whether that's a correct result or not, I don't know. The CHAIRMAN. Let me move to another area. Unfortunately,
there's much more to talk about that—and I appreciate your willingness to engage me on this. The tape with your statement that "I
don't think in the field of constitutional law precedent is important" and your comments yesterday in response to questions, raise
some issues about precedent. And today you made a distinction
that I'd like to pursue. Judge BORK. Before we get off that tape, Senator, I would like to
say this: you have in your hands speech after speech and interview
after interview where I have said some constitutional decisions are
too embedded in the fabric of the nation to overturn. The CHAIRMAN. And, to the best of my knowledge, you have only
used two examples ever.
Judge BORK. Well, I was trying not to get into trouble by saying
too much.
The CHAIRMAN. I understand, I understand. I just want to make
sure. Now, I don't want to go back to the tape. I want to go
Judge BORK. But you mentioned the tape, and I Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, it's untoward of me, but I
would like to hear him finish, that he address it. I don't want to
stay here all night, but
The CHAIRMAN. I am just trying to hurry the thing up.
Senator SIMPSON. I would like to hear a full response to either a question or a multi-question that is directed at him—I really would. And I will stay here as long as you wish.
The CHAIRMAN. Please go ahead. Judge BORK. One of the problems, Senator, is that you move from topic to topic, and I don't get a chance to discuss either the The CHAIRMAN. Please go back to any topic you want to discuss, I'm sorry.
Judge BORK. That particular tape I made the distinction between precedent in the statutory context and precedent in the constitu­tional context, and gave the reason—and that is an utterly accept­ed distinction by everybody.
The CHAIRMAN. That's all I wanted to talk about.
Judge BORK. That is the only time in all of these interviews and speeches where I didn't say: and there are some constitutional deci­sions that are too embedded, too late to overturn. And to make something out of that in a question-and-answer period strikes me as ridiculous.
The CHAIRMAN. I'm not. Judge BORK. I know. The CHAIRMAN. If you had let—if I had gone through, I could
have saved us that. This is one time if I had said the whole thing it would have saved time—all I want to talk about is the distinction that you enunciated today' between constitutional questions and how precedent affects those, and legislative decisions and how precedent affects those.
Now, I want to make sure I understand what we mean by, what you mean by constitutional as opposed to legislative cases. For ex­ample, Brown Shoe v. United States—you are obviously familiar with the case. That's a statutory case, correct?
Judge BORK. Well, yes, sir, but you have got a very unique stat­ute involved there. If you deal with the antitrust laws, as the Court has said many times, you are dealing with open-textured statutory provisions much like the Constitution, and in fact you are dealing with a large delegation from Congress to the courts to deal with competition.
The CHAIRMAN. Let's start at the other end. Shelley v. Kraemer
is a constitutional case. Judge BORK. Right. The CHAIRMAN. Baker v. Carr is- a constitutional case. Judge BORK. Right. The CHAIRMAN. Katzenbach is a constitutional case. Judge BORK. Yes. The CHAIRMAN. Again, I'm not going to go through them all, I'm
not trying to be argumentative. I just want to make sure that I un­derstand.
Now, it is obviously—I shouldn't say—your distinction, constitu­tional versus statutory, is drawn, as it has been by many others, to suggest that when it is constitutional, precedent is more binding.
Judge BORK. NO, quite the contrary. The CHAIRMAN. Oh, I see. Judge BORK. The reason for the distinction given by Justice
Brandeis, Justice Douglas, everybody who talks about it, is that if a court reads the Social Security Act incorrectly, if a court reads the Mann Act incorrectly, Congress can correct the court instantly: it can pass a statute saying we didn't mean that, do it this way—no problem. If a court misinterprets a fundamental profound provision of the Constitution, Congress cannot change it.
The CHAIRMAN. Like the Griswold case.
Judge BORK. Right, like the Griswold case, like Brown v. Board of Education, like any case you want to choose. The CHAIRMAN. I'm with you. Judge BORK. Congress cannot change it. That means, as everybody has said, the Court should be more willing to rethink a consti­tutional decision because only the Court can correct the mistake, nobody else can.
The CHAIRMAN. That's a point I thought I was making. Judge BORK. YOU said precedent meant more in constitutional cases than it did in statutory cases, and the reverse is true.
The CHAIRMAN. YOU are exactly right; I misspoke. So that in the constitutional cases, those are the areas where the Court can go back, because if they don't go back and correct a mistake, no one can correct it.
Judge BORK. Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. None of us can pass a law changing Shelley,changing Griswold, changing Katzenbach, unless we pass a consti­tutional amendment, because there is a constitutional principle in there.
Judge BORK. Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, you then go on, as you've heard a hundred times today—again, I'm trying to get this out—you say—and you've said, and I forget which speech, but you will remember it when I say it, if you don't, well, I'll dig it up—about how an origin­alist judge would have no problem overruling an non-originalist precedent because that precedent, by its very basis of a judicial phi­losophy, has no legitimacy. Or the statement you made earlier, which is: I don't think in the field of constitutional law precedent is all that important.
Judge BORK. I know, but in the second speech you read—that's a Federalist Society speech—that particular remark was scribbled into the margin, as you know, because you have the notes from which I spoke—and in the very next paragraph I go on to say of non-originalist decisions on the commerce clause, that it's too late to overrule them.
So there was never a case except that one question-and-answer period at Canesius College when I said then you make the point that you can't overrule something.
The CHAIRMAN. Okay. I am not saying you can't. Let me get to the last point. Judge BORK. I know. But you shouldn't cite that Federalist speech becauseThe CHAIRMAN. Okay. Let me back off then and go on. If it is a
Senator THURMOND. Did you finish, Judge?
Judge BORK. I think so, Senator. Thank you.
The CHAIRMAN. If it is a constitutional principle involved, the Court, if it believes it has made the decision wrongly, can and should overrule it, unless it has become settled doctrine.
Judge BORK. I gave the—well, of course Plessy v. Ferguson, sepa­rate but equal, was settled doctrine.
The CHAIRMAN. But the point—in other words, the point I am trying to make is to make sure I understand you. You say that when a court made a mistake on a constitutional principle, that a judge, if he believed it was a mistake—a Justice—should come in and overrule it unless
Judge BORK. There are a lot of factors. The CHAIRMAN. Unless it is a commerce clause, unless it is—you know
Judge BORK. NO. There are a lot of factors. I have listed them all for you already. Unless private expectations have grown up around it, people have internalized the right; government institutions, pri­vate institutions have grown up in reliance upon it, and so forth and so forth.
The fact is the Supreme Court, I am told, has overruled about 250 constitutional cases in its time. The CHAIRMAN. I am sure it has, which gets me to the last point
on this. Back to your dozens of cases Judge BORK. Oh. The Chairman. That should be overruled. Judge BORK. Reconsidered, I think I said. The CHAIRMAN. Reconsidered. Excuse me, reconsidered. Now I am trying to figure out the reason why a lot of people are
concerned is because the cases where—and I will make the state­ment and you respond, please. You have made, by your own admis­sion, and by the admission of those who are for you and again you, provocative statements about dozens of cases.
You have—I wouldn't say dozens. At least a dozen or—maybe 20
that I can think of. Judge BORK. I have what? The CHAIRMAN. YOU have made provocative statements. Judge BORK. Oh. The CHAIRMAN. Let me go through the whole thing, so you understand what I am getting at, so I am not in any way misleading you.
You started off—the reason why there is some concern on my part, at least, is you say there are dozens of cases that should be reconsidered. Some of the dozens of cases may be some of the ones you have written about—we don't know. Some of the ones you have written about, if you mean they should be reconsidered, scare the living devil out of some of us, like me.
If you think that you should reconsider the rationale, the ration­ale in Griswold, it worries the devil out of me. If you mean you think you should reconsider the rationale in Roe, it worries a lot of other people. If you mean you consider the rationale—and I can go down the list.
Now you have said that you know what those cases are, at least in your quotes, these dozens, and yet you have come back and you have made, at least you have left the impression with me that the precedent is so binding generally that you are really not going to go look at any of these cases.
So you have Orrin Hatch reading a list of all these cases that we
have raised as concerns, as if to say: Isn't it ridiculous, Judge? You
would never reconsider those cases. So there is a dilemma here. Judge BORK. There are some I would re—No, I have never told you that I am so bound with precedent that I am not going to reconsider any case. Of course, it would take a lot of Justices to reconsider a case. The CHAIRMAN. NO, I understand that. Judge BORK. And I have never said I am so The CHAIRMAN. But not the principle, because the principle
might come back up.Judge BORK. I beg your pardon? I didn't understand "the principle."The CHAIRMAN. The principle in the case. You are not going to go back and reconsider Griswold; no. But the principle embodied in
Griswold is likely to come up again somewhere along Judge BORK. It may. It may. A number of cases may come up in various fields that the Court may wish to re—I think the Court last
term overruled four cases at the end of the term, something like
that—or maybe during the term. You have to think about it. You
have to be careful what you do. You have to know what effects you
are causing on people, and so forth, and on settled expectations.
But it happens. The CHAIRMAN. YOU tell us, not cases, but principles—constitu­tional principles—you think warrant being reconsidered by the
Court and you would feel obliged to reconsider as a judge. Just the
principle, not the case. Judge BORK. Well, I don't think I should go into that any more than I have already gone into here, which has been quite a bit. I
mean, I have discussed my problems with various kinds of reasoning in some kinds of cases, and I think I have gone about as far as I
should go.The CHAIRMAN. Okay. Let me finish up with the one principle, constitutional principle, that still really disturbs me in terms of not
being fully embraced, and that is what was referred to, I have been
referring to as the marital right of privacy. Judge Bork, there has been a lot of discussion, by me mostly I
guess, about that issue with you. So to make the facts clear, you
and others have basically said, that in the Connecticut case, the
Griswold case, Connecticut made it a crime for a married couple to
use contraceptives. But there is another part of the law that made
it a crime to give couples or anyone else information and advice
about contraceptives. And the executive director and medical director of a birth control clinic were arrested because they examined a
woman and prescribed a contraceptive. The Supreme Court found that the criminal laws were unconstitutional. Now they inferred with a right of—excuse of—they interfered with the State by talking about this right of marital privacy,
which Douglas, as you have gone into detail about, disagreeing
with, said was older than the Bill of Rights.
Now I have got a real simple question. With the views you have
now, had you been sitting on the Court, how would you have ruled
on that case?
Judge BORK. It is quite clear. I think marital privacy is a right older than the Bill of Rights, and that is why it has always been respected. Even in Connecticut, they didn't enforce that law against married couples and they had a terrible time, the Yale pro­fessors did, getting these doctors arrested.
But passing that, it is a right deeply built into our society, and no doubt about it. But, if I were sitting on the Court and Justice Douglas circulated that essay about emanations and penumbras re­sulting in a generalized right of privacy, which is wholly undefined and we don't know where it will go next—no, I would not have agreed to that opinion.
Marital privacy is a very important thing. And if a case came up in which I had to think about a constitutional principle, I would think very hard because it is so important. However, if when I was finished thinking I could make no legitimate constitutional case, I would not make a decision that was not justified by the Constitu­tion.
The CHAIRMAN. Let me conclude with a letter I received from Harriet F. Pilpell, for Katherine G. Rohrbach and herself. I assume she is an attorney with
Judge BORK. I know them.
The CHAIRMAN. Okay. I don't know her.
Judge BORK. Well, there are two women there.
The CHAIRMAN. Okay. She says:
Dear Senator Biden. On behalf of Katherine G. Rohrbach
Am I pronouncing it correctly?
Judge BORK. I believe so.
The CHAIRMAN.
And myself, I write this letter to clarify the legal situation as it existed in Connecti­cut prior to the decision in Griswold v. Connecticut. There is a decision of the Con­necticut Supreme Court of Errors, dated March 6, 1940, a copy of which is enclosed. You will note that there was a prosecution of two doctors and a nurse in violation of the Connecticut statute against the use of contraceptives.
The case did not go beyond the highest court in Connecticut; however, as a result of this decision, nine Planned Parenthood clinics which had been providing contra­ceptive services until they were closed, remained closed until the decision of the United States Supreme Court in Griswold v. Connecticut in 1965. During the inter­vening period, efforts were made to bring the question of constitutionality of the Connecticut statute to the U.S. Supreme Court. Although the Court did not review in two cases prior to Griswold, they decided against the opponents of the statute on technical grounds.
In the second of such cases, there were dissents from the denial to pass upon the statute by a leading conservative Justice and leading liberal Justice. Both Justices Harlan and Douglas dissented in separate findings, stating that in their view the Connecticut statute violated a basic constitutional right of privacy, a position which the majority of the Court adopted later in Griswold, in 1965.
The citation of State v. Nelson Godrich, etc., are 126 Conn. 412—
Well, I won't go through that.
The citation of the third case—
I will skip that, too.
Katherine Rohrbach represented the Planned Parenthood League of Connecticut from 1955, and I have represented the Planned Parenthood Federation of America since 1940. From 1940 until the decision in the Griswold case, no birth control serv­ices were available to Connecticut women who could not afford the price of a pri­vate physician.
The whole point being very clear, Judge. That that case, as at
least these two attorneys argue, the reason they wanted the test
case was the Planned Parenthood outlets had been shut down by
the 1940 case, and poor women couldn't get contraceptives but
wealthy women could. Judge BORK. I don't think that is true that poor women couldn't.
But, anywayThe CHAIRMAN. At least not through Planned Parenthood. Judge BORK. I said to begin with when we started this that the
only way they enforced the statute was against birth control clinics
that operated in the open. That is right.The CHAIRMAN. But they weren't operated in the open. That is
why they didn't enforce it Judge BORK. NO, no. But now we have shift The CHAIRMAN. They were closed down. Judge BORK. NOW we have shifted from the marital bedroom to
the question of whether they are dealing with birth control clinics. The CHAIRMAN. I see. Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, I think that there is a distortion there that needs to be cleaned up. He said, if I recall, and I
just want to get the record correct, that there had never been a
case brought on the issue of the bedroom—the right to privacy, the
marital right. That which you read has something totally different
from that. I happen to be a big—I think Planned Parenthood is a remarkable organization. I have put my money and my other efforts into
helping them. But, for Heaven's sakes, that doesn't have anything
to do with this issue. That doesn't have anything to do with it. The CHAIRMAN. Well, you and I will get a lot of chances to
debate that on the floor. But, go ahead, Judge. Judge BORK. Also, I should say that in Poe v. Oilman, which was
the predecessor case, the one in which Justice Harlan relied I
think not upon a right of privacy, but upon a right derived an ordered liberty concept, the majority in that case said we haven't
been shown and we can't see that this law is ever enforced against
anybody, and they had to go back down and get somebody arrested
and come back up.The CHAIRMAN. Okay. My last question, and it is kind of a reiteration. You have indicated you wouldn't have voted with the majority in Griswold. Would you have voted with the minority in Gris­wold?
Judge BORK. If I had not seen a better argument than the one
that Justice Douglas offered, I would have joined Justice Black,
Hugo Black, and Justice Potter Stewart.
The CHAIRMAN. Have you ever seen a better argument? Judge BORK. I have never looked at an argument from that area,
again.
The CHAIRMAN. I tkank you very much, Judge. We were going to
break anyway and there is a vote on. We will break now for 10
minutes, and then we will finish up. Thank you very much.
 
The CHAIRMAN. Judge, we are getting down to the wire here. We
are going to finish tonight and we will, if we are required to, go
much more than another hour and a half or so. We will break very hour from now on, to make sure there is some time. I assume it is
your preference to finish up tonight as well. Judge BORK. It is very definitely my preference, Mr. Chairman. Senator LEAHY. I might note for some of us at the far end of the
table it is our preference, if the Judge is able, too. I want to go
back home tomorrow and see my family. The CHAIRMAN. All right. Senator Specter? Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, I want to turn to a subject on the finality of Supreme Court decisions in terms of interpreting the Constitution.
This picks up a somewhat broader subject than Marbury v. Madison. There has been some discussion of Marbury v. Madison, not a
whole lot.
There are some prominent people in our country today who
appear to be questioning the finality of Supreme Court decisions.
One Presidential candidate flatly questions the finality of the Supreme Court decisions, saying, as I understand his comments as
printed in an extensive article in the Washington Post that the
President has authority to interpret the Constitution, that the Congress has the authority to interpret the Constitution, as co-equal
branches, notwithstanding what the Supreme Court of the United
States has said.
There has been a statement made by Attorney General Edwin
Meese which borders on that conclusion. Attorney General Meese
may not have intended to reach that conclusion as he addressed an
op-ed piece to the Washington Post after a speech he made at
Tulane on October 21, 1986. But I believe that this raises the most fundamental question for
the Supreme Court and for the Constitution, and it is a question in
my judgment of enormous importance. And Attorney General
Meese said this:
But as constitutional historian, Charles Warren, once noted, what is most impor­tant to remember is that "however the Court may interpret the provisions of the Constitution, it is still the Constitution which is the law, not the decisions of the Court." By this, of course, Charles Warren did not mean that a constitutional deci­sion by the Supreme Court lacks the character of law. Obviously, it does have bind­ing quality. It binds the parties in a case and also the executive branch for whatever enforcement is necessary, but such a decision does not establish a supreme law of the land that is binding of all persons and parts of the Government henceforth and forever more.
Now what troubles me about this statement is that Attorney
General Meese appears to be giving support to what Charles
Warren says; that even after the Supreme Court has made a decision it is the Constitution which is the law, suggesting some difference from what the Court has said. And then, Mr. Meese's own
words, saying that the Supreme Court decision has a binding quality for the parties in the case, and also the executive branch for
whatever enforcement is necessary, suggesting that the Supreme
Court decision does not bind beyond that range. My question to you is do you agree with what Attorney General
Meese has said? Judge BORK. Well, I am not quite sure what it means, Senator,
but let me say this. He started off that somebody said that the Congress and the President can also interpret the Constitution, which is quite true. When the Congress decides to pass a statute, it
must—it should, since they have taken an oath to defend the Constitution, think about the constitutionality of what it proposes to
do. When the President is about to act, he should—she should, if
we should have one—think about it, too; and usually he gets advice
from the Office of Legal Counsel about the constitutionality of
what the President proposes to do. But having done that, the Supreme Court—the courts and ultimately the Supreme Court, are the final determiners of what the
Constitution is. But when the Court decides a case, I think as Abe
Lincoln said in his debates with Steven Douglas about the Dred
Scott decision, he has no desire to challenge that decision or say
nobody is bound by it, but you are free to go back and ask the
Court in a future case to change its mind. And I think that is true for a while. Professor Herbert Wechsler,
I think it was, who said that you can ask the Court to rethink until
it becomes clear that it is settled, and when it is settled, it is settled. And this ties into, of course, the discussion we have had about
precedent and respect for it. Courts can rethink, but it may be, as I
have said before, too late to rethink for a variety of reasons. Senator SPECTER. But you would agree, then, that a Supreme
Court decision has more of a binding quality than simply on the
parties to the case and on the executive branch to enforce that specific decision? Judge BORK. That is true. Senator SPECTER. And unless there is an appeal and a change in
the Court's decision, that such a decision does establish a supreme
law of the land that is binding on all persons and all parts of the
Government. Judge BORK. That is true. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I want to turn now to a statement
you made in Barnes y. Kline, which has been the subject of some
discussion as to standing. But in your enumeration of the powers of
the President, you said this in your dissent, at page 55 of the opinion: It—referring to the Constitution—quote, was to allow room
for the evolution of the powers of various offices and branches, that
the Constitution's specification of those powers was made somewhat vague. The framers contemplated organic development, not a
structure made rigid at the outset by rapid judicial definition of
the entire subject as if from a blueprint." There, obviously, you treat executive powers as a blueprint in
the Constitution with a fuller statement to be developed as organic
law.
Why not such a similar interpretation for the Bill of Rights?
Why the necessity to find a specific constitutional right as a prerequisite for dealing with State legislative action?
Judge BORK. For this reason, Senator. I said specifically the only
time I got into a debate with my colleagues over this—and the colleague I was having the debate with was Judge Scalia—was in the
Oilman case, where I found a column protected by the first amendment. And as I explained there, there will be an evolution of the
Bill of Rights as new threats to the freedoms guaranteed develop—
whether those threats are developments in legal doctrine, as in
libel law, or threats coming from technology, or whatever it is; and you do have an organic growth. And there is a lot of freedom in
that. I mean, these are questions of degree and questions of judgment, which is why you need judges and not just read the Constitu­tion.
But I do not think that I can ever justify a judge putting a free­dom or value in the Constitution that the framers or the ratifiers
in no way contemplated. Now, they did not contemplate the circumstances, so you may get an evolution for that reason. They did
not contemplate future developments, so you may get an evolution
of a value that is in the Constitution. But I think they have to put the value there.
Senator SPECTER. But in your quotation in Barnes v. Kline, when it comes to executive power, you allow for growth. In your opinion
in Oilman v. Evans and Novak, where Judge—now Justice—Scalia
criticized you as going beyond the intent of the framers, you did
expand the constitutional right, and your opinion in Oilman v.
Evans and Novak might be said to have some similarities to Justice Douglas' opinion in Griswold v. Connecticut. That is an articulation by a judge of a constitutional right which at least Justice Scalia said was not within the intent of the framers.
Now, why not that as a general principle of constitutional law?
Judge BORK. In Oilman, I had a constitutional freedom specified
in the Constitution, and the question was what it takes to protect
that freedom, and I evolved that. Justice Douglas did not point to
any freedom or value specified in the Constitution, and I think that is the difference between the two cases.
Senator SPECTER. Well, liberty is in the Preamble of the Constitu­tion. You have objected to an interpretation or a specification of
liberty rights in your writings on Meyer v. Nebraska and Pierce v.
Society of Sisters, but why not liberty in the very Preamble of the Constitution as a basis for privacy in Griswold v. Connecticut?
Judge BORK. Senator, I think the reason for that is—and you can use liberty in the 14th amendment; it speaks of no person may be deprived of life, limb, or liberty without due process of law
Senator SPECTER. Well, I do not pick that one up because it is due process, which you have objected to. That is why I picked the fundamental of liberty from the preamble. But take liberty either
place. It is a cherished value; it is the cornerstone of the Constitution. It seems to me very rational—as rational to say that privacy
is derived from liberty that liberty implies privacy, as it does to say
that freedom of the press implies the Evans-Novak rights which
you found in the Oilman case..
Judge BORK. Well, the difficulty, I think, Senator, is that if I decide that I am going to protect liberty, just in general, not without any specific provision of the Constitution, then I have no—obviously, I cannot say everybody is free to do whatever they want to
do, and no statute may exist because it interferes with liberty; we
cannot have anarchy. So then I have to define what liberties—I
have to define it without guidance from the Constitution—what liberties people ought to have and what liberties they ought not to
have.
Now, that is exactly the effort I engaged in for about 6 or 7 years
in that course on constitutional theory that I thought with Alex
Bickel. And I became convinced that it was an utterly subjective
enterprise and that I was running my values into what I was
coming up with. I do not know—each of us may have a different
idea about what liberty requires. And if we have no guidance from
the Constitution itself, it is just the judge legislating the Constitution—you know, if a judge said, "I think I will enact a statute," we
would all recognize that that was improper. But a statute, I assume
Congress could repeal. If a judge legislates the Constitution, I think
the situation is far more serious, and I do not want judges, including me, going around, saying, "You have this liberty, you do not
have that liberty," and I cannot explain why I got it. Senator SPECTER. But why should you be as free to find addition­al executive powers, as you say you can in Barnes v. Kline, moving
from a blueprint?Judge BORK. Let me see what I said. Senator SPECTER. YOU said the Constitution's specification of
those powers was made somewhat vague Judge BORK. Yes Senator SPECTER. That the framers contemplated organic development. Why not organic development for liberty? Why
only organic development for executive power? Judge BORK. But it is not executive power; it is also congressional power. There has been an organic development of congressional
power, too, in this country. Senator SPECTER. All right, all right. This really focused on exec­utive power. But take it as you have articulated it—why organic
development for congressional or executive power, but why not organic development for people power, defined as liberty? Judge BORK. Well, there is one decisive difference between you
and me, Senator Specter, and that is you were elected; I was not.
And if the people do not like what you are doing with respect to
liberty, they have a cure. If they do not like what I am doing with
respect to liberty, they have no recourse. Senator SPECTER. YOU were not elected when you decided the Oilman case. Judge BORK. That is right. But I had a constitutional provision, a constitutional liberty, specified for me, and I was empowered to do
my best to ask what is required in this case to protect that freedom. Senator SPECTER. Well Judge BORK. NOW, I do not mean to say that judges do not have
latitude, and they may not decide different things differently. But
at least I knew that I had a constitutional liberty with a lot of Supreme Court decisions about how broad that liberty was supposed
to be, with a history of our country, and I could decide it. But I
could not go off and say, well, I will take the first amendment and
decide a case about minimum wage laws. Senator SPECTER. But Judge Bork, in the tradition of our law,
and as the Supreme Court has interpreted the decisions, including
Holmes and Black and Frankfurter, there are traditional expansions of liberty very much within the framework that you articulate in Barnes v. Kline and that you applied in the Oilman case, in
terms of the contours of the law which do not have any more specification.
717
For example, Frankfurter, whom you characterized as one of the
stars of the Supreme Court, had this to say in Roshin v.California—and I hope to take up with you some criminal law cases at a
later time and some of the due process considerations generally,
but it fits in right here—this is what he said in citing tradition
from Cardozo—and it might be worth just a moment of explanation
to say that Roshin was a criminal law case where police officers in
California broke into a person's house and pumped his stomach,
and the Supreme Court suppressed the evidence and found for the
defendant in the case. And Frankfurter quotes Cardozo as saying
there are values, quote, "so rooted in the tradition and conscience
of our people as to be ranked as fundamental"—language which is
very close to what your colleague Professor Bickel used. And then
Frankfurter says, "The vague contours of the due process clause do
not leave judges at large.' That is what you are concerned about.
And Frankfurter goes on and says, "We may not draw on our
merely personal and private notions and disregard the limits that
bind judges in their judicial functions. Even though the concept of
due process of law is not final and fixed, these limits are derived
from considerations that are fused in the whole nature of our judicial process." And he refers to Cardozo's "Nature of the Judicial
Process", one of the most famous law books ever written, that I
know you are familiar with. Now, that is the contour of the interpretation of the law. That is
the contour you follow in Oilman. That is the contour you articu­late in Barnes v. Kline. Why not a similar contour for liberty?
Judge BORK. Because, Senator, I can do anything with the con­cept of liberty which is unstructured. I can reach any result I want to. For example
Senator SPECTER. YOU can do that pretty much with freedom of the press.Judge BORK. I have to be talking about a press case, and I have
to be talking in terms of the kinds of categories that have been
built up in libel cases in the past, rhetorical hyperbole and so forth; actual malice, all that. There is a whole structure there.
Now, we should remind ourselves that there was a time when the word "liberty" in the 14th amendment was used by judges to
strike down social reform legislation. They struck down minimum wage laws in the name of liberty; they struck down laws in the Lochner case, law regulating the hours that bakers could work. They went through social reform laws very fast, in the name of lib­erty, and struck them down. And I cannot say they are right or wrong about liberty. I can say they were wrong because they were using a concept to reach results they liked, and the concept did not confine them, and they should not have been using that concept.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I do not think the Supreme Court has to be right all the time. The question is what are the powers of
the Court.
Judge BORK. That is right.
Senator SPECTER. The Court has a consistent tradition, starting with Fletcher y. Peck, where Chief Justice Marshall talks about
values rooted in the conscience of the people, which moves away
from the specific language of a particularized right, so that you
have a very long history in the Constitution of the United States,
86-974 0-89-25
of constitutional interpretation, which does not require a particu­larization of a specific right.
Judge BORK. I think in Fletcher v. Peck, if memory serves, the statement by Marshall was somewhat ambiguous. He refers to the nature of society, that maybe there is something in the nature of society. But in any event, he did not use that nature of society in that case—didn't he use the contract clause?
Senator SPECTER. He used the contract clause, and he also used the language which is more generalized, and this is what Fletcher
v. Peck held. And when you say it is vague and generalized, I would not disagree with that. You can say that about most of the Supreme Court decisions, with all due respect. But he says this, at page 139 of the opinion: "If a State is neither restrained by the general principles of our political institutions, nor by the words of the Constitution, from impairing the obligation of its own con­tracts, such a defense would be a valid one."
Well, that is fair to read as an alternative holding to freedom of contracts or to the "general principles of our political institutions". So you go back to 1810, with Marshall, in Fletcher v. Peck, on the power of the court again and again and again.
And I grant you that the Lochner decision is a bad one. And I think the Court is going to come to bad decisions. But a more fun­damental issue for me is what is the power of the Court to do; and if you restrict the power of the Court to an articulated right, then you very much limit, as I see it, the tradition of the Court.
And I see in your own writing, Barnes v. Kline, when you deal with executive and congressional power, and it raises a question which I would like your comment on, a question raised by others, as to whether there is not a broader expanse as you interpret law, Judge Bork, if it comes to Congress or if it comes to the executive, as contrasted with the interpretation of law as it relates to the in­dividual, that individual liberty.
Judge BORK. Well, I do not think so, Senator. I hate to say what I have said before, but the fact is I have decided some constitutional cases, I have decided first amendment cases, and found for individ­ual liberty. I decided a double jeopardy clause case just the other day and found for individual liberty. There is no problem that way. My only problem is I do not want to be a free-floating legislator of constitutional law; I just do not.
Once a judge gets to the point where he says he is allowed to use the concept of liberty to do whatever he thinks liberty requires, then in a nomination hearing like this, that judge should be asked to make campaign promises about what he thinks liberty requires in specific instances, so that you would be satisfied he is going to do the right thing.
And we have been proceeding on the assumption, which I think is quite correct, that I should not be asked to make promises about particular cases. But if I am free to decide liberty, then you ought to ask me what I am going to do about the minimum wage law.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I would not ask you what you are going to do about the minimum wage law, just as I would not ask you about what you are going to do about the abortion case.
Judge BORK. No, but that is only because you think I am confined by some principles and not free to make up liberty as I see
fit. Senator SPECTER. NO, because I do not think that you ought to be
asked about a specific case; but I think it is fair to ask you about a
generalized principle, and I think it is fair to ask you about the interpretation and the structure of our constitutional government.
And I think that you have moved considerably in your statement
about equal protection not being limited only to race. And I intend
to talk to you later this evening about your interpretations of the
antitrust law, because there, you take the Congress' words, and you
feel very free to disregard them, at least Judge BORK. Oh, no, oh, no, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Well, let me pick that strain up Judge BORK. All right, but I would like to get on the record right
now that I do not feel free to disregard what Congress decided. Senator SPECTER. Well, let us pick up the antitrust strain in just
a minute or two and focus continuing on this issue about the tradition of the Court to make interpretations, as you suggest for Congress and the executive in Barnes v. Kline, and as you have in
Oilman, in terms of what the Court has done in other matters, and
as to what has been written. Alexander Bickel, to whom you refer again and again, has written on the subject, and has talked about the leisure and the insulation of judges, a quotation that you refer to many, many times in
your speeches.Judge BORK. Because once I became a judge, I though it was a
funny concept of a judge's life. Senator SPECTER. Well, there is less insulation if you are a Supreme Court nominee, at least during the confirmation process Judge BORK. There is also no leisure on any court these days. Senator SPECTER. Well, perhaps more leisure than legislators
have.
Have you had an all-night session on the court of appeals that
runs to 6:30 in the morning, Judge Bork? Judge BORK. NO, I have not. Senator SPECTER. We have them with some frequency. Judge BORK. Well, I guess I picked the right Branch.  Senator SPECTER. But the point that Bickel makes, and the point
that so many Supreme Court Justices have made, and the point
that the Constitution makes on life tenure is the insulation; and
that gives a Supreme Court Justice perhaps a little more courage—
except, perhaps, for Senators who have repetitive profiles in courage—but the history of our country has been that the Congress has
refused to act, and the executive has refused to act. And you were
quoted as saying that Plessy v. Ferguson had ceased to be equal
with being separate in the 1920's, 1930's and 1940's, and it took
until the 1950's for the Supreme Court to decide the case. And
there has been a reliance by the people of this country on the
courts as a refuge when they cannot get legislative bodies to act
because of unwillingness to face the kinds of tough decisions or executives, because the other side of the coin of being elected is that
there is a tremendous inertia and unwillingness to face problems,
and the insulation that judges have has provided the tradition, and the tradition of the Supreme Court of the United States, to make
good faith interpretations in an expansive way. And that is really what I am looking to, because I think that is
the tradition of the Court. Judge BORK. It is, and I could not agree with you more. But you mentioned—I guess I should say something—you mentioned Justice
Hugo Black as being in this tradition you described. I think he was
not. Justice Hugo Black was constantly complaining about the natural law approach to the Constitution, and I think he dissented, in
Rochin v. California, on precisely that ground, that this shock the
conscience of the Court business is a natural law Senator SPECTER. He wanted to put it on specific grounds in the
Bill of Rights as a privilege against self-incrimination and unreasonable search and seizure. He did not avoid the problem Judge BORK. NO. Senator SPECTER. And when the crunch came, on
Boiling v. Sharpe, on the District of Columbia school desegregation,
Justice Black was with the majority on desegregating the schools
on due process grounds, so that when the crunch came, Justice
Black was willing to use due process—even though there was no
specification. Judge BORK. Yes, he read an equal protection component in. I do
not want to name names, but there were judges who later had
second thoughts about that decision. Senator SPECTER. Well, Justice Black did not read an equal com­ponent in it so far as that opinion was concerned; he did not write
any concurrence. He simply followed Chief Justice Warren's opinion. There was no equal protection read into it as far as Justice
Black was concerned. Judge BORK. Well, I think the opinion said that due process also
has components of equality, and that has been taken since to mean
that there is an equal protection component of the due process
clause. Well, I have filed briefs that way, and I seem to win cases
that way.Senator SPECTER. Well, you may file briefs that way, Judge Bork,
and I will send for the opinion again; I thought you and I had finished discussing Boiling v. Sharpe.Judge BORK. Well, I do not think there is any point in going back over whether it incorporates an equal protection standard or not,
but that is my understanding. Senator SPECTER. Well, the opinion by Chief Justice Warren is pretty flat, that it is a due process consideration, and it is a matter
of fundamental fairness, and he does not find equal protection ap
plicable to the federal government. On the contrary, he says we
have to write this opinion separately, because so far as the States
are concerned, equal protection applies. But so far as the federal
government is concerned, there is no equal protection clause; therefore, there has to be a separate opinion, and it is put on due process grounds.
And Justice Black goes along with the opinion of the Court. He
does not file a concurrence. Judge BORK. I should say, Senator—you said Justice Black was
not afraid to face the problem in Rochin—nor would I be. And it
seems to me the most likely thing to do is what Justice Black did,
and that is place it on fourth amendment grounds. The use of a stomach pump is a terrible way to punish somebody.
It is a very painful process and should not be allowed—at a minimum should not be allowed—unless there is a determination by a
judge that there is such probable cause to think this fellow swal­lowed the cocaine that you can use it. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I think it is fine for you to do jus­tice in Rochin without the due process clause if you can find it. Now the question is how are you going to do justice in privacy cases without the due process clause—if you can find an alterna­tive, that is fine. But what I am looking for and what I think the tradition of the Court has been is not to be hidebound by being able to find a specific right if it comports to fundamental principles rooted in the conscience of our tradition, which is the Cardozo lan­guage, or fundamental considerations of fairness. And in the nature of the judicial process that we have had since 1810, Fletcher
v. Peck, there is that really well-established tradition. Judge BORK. Well, Chief Justice Marshall—I hate to keep interrupting, but a point goes by, and I do not want to not get a chance
to say somethingSenator SPECTER. Okay. Judge BORK. That kind of language never appeared in the Marshall Court after that; it just died out. Senator SPECTER. SO what? Judge BORK. Well, I think they became nervous about it. But the
point I wanted to make about Cardozo and Palko v.Connecticut
and the concept of ordered liberty was a much narrower and less
dynamic form of judicial decisionmaking than the right or privacy
cases are. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, there is a continual line of analy­sis in your writings, too The CHAIRMAN. Senator, would you make this the last line, and
then we will come back to you? You have a little more time. Senator SPECTER. Sure. The CHAIRMAN. YOU have a few more minutes. I just wanted to
let you know. Senator SPECTER. All right. Judge Bork, I was starting to comment about a strain in your
writing about the Constitution responding to the demands of the
people—and here again you refer to Bickel with some frequency—
and that if the Court makes a decision that does not have popular
support, it will change; or if the Court makes an opinion which
does have substantial minority opposition, in the absence of some
majority support, it will change. And you made an interesting comment in the League of Women Voters publication, this year, 1987,
where you said, talking about the evolution of constitutional doctrine, referring to Supreme Court Justices, quote, "Furthermore,
they are screened through a Senate Judiciary Committee, which
has become, I think, increasingly sophisticated"—one of your comments which may not draw any objection from this panel—"a
Senate Judiciary Committee, which has become, I think, increasingly sophisticated; that what is at stake are constitutional issues.
So in the long run, the Constitution is not merely what the judges
say it is, but what the people want it to be." Now, if a Constitution can be influenced by a sophisticated
Senate Judiciary Committee and can be responsive to what the
people want it to be, then why the harsh constricture that a right
has to be specified before you would interpret it through a very important American value? Judge BORK. For this reason, Senator—but the right does not have to be specified; some rights and powers are inferred from
structure and so forth; I mean, it does not have to be specified entirely.Senator SPECTER. That is part of my problem. That is an articula­tion that you agree with, but you limit it, even when you come to
what so many people think are really fundamental values. Judge BORK. Well, I agree they are fundamental. I am now
trying to recall—what exactly was I—I am sorry. Senator SPECTER. The question is that if the Constitution has sufficient flexibility to respond Judge BORK. Oh, I remember now. Senator SPECTER. To what the people want it to be,
and a sophisticated Judiciary Committee, et cetera. Judge BORK. I do not think, Senator, that by that I mean that
the Constitution has built into it flexibility for judges to keep responding to the people, because if they did that, of course, the Bill
of Rights might disappear when the people are pretty sore. What I meant is—and I think I have said it before—judges unfortunately are mortal, which I find increasingly disturbing, and if
there is a political pressure in the society for certain results, as
there was in the New Deal to expand the commerce power beyond
what the Court was currently willing to let it be, the Court cannot
forever withstand that strong political pressure, if for no other
reason than that Justices die and retire, and the President will
nominate somebody whose views are more expansive about the
commerce clause—which is precisely what happened in the New
Deal era. And the Senate will confirm them, and you will get a de
facto change in the Constitution, not because the document is flexible, but because human beings come and go. Senator SPECTER. IS that bad? Judge BORK. Probably not. In a way, one could wish that we had
done what Canada did. As I recall, the judges up there were frustrating similar social legislation in a way that ours were, and
Canada amended their Constitution. I wish we had done that.
But good or bad, it is inevitable, the kind of development I described. Senator SPECTER. We will return to the subject. Thank you very much, Judge Bork. The CHAIRMAN. Senator DeConcini? Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, it has been a long day, and I am sure you will be as
happy as we will when it is over. I have a number of questions, and
rather than belabor and stay here for several hours, I am going to
ask the chairman if he is going to entertain submitting some of
those questions to you, because I know there are other members
who would like to have an opportunity to talk to you, and I know you would like to have it finished today.
The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, any question that any member wishes to submit rather than ask, I am sure the Judge would be delighted
Senator DECONCINI. Yes, fine.
Judge BORK. In a way—I do not mean to be unpleasant or any­thing, Mr. Chairman, but in a way I would rather write an answer to a question right now—just in the interest of getting home and getting some dinner; that is all.
Senator DECONCINI. Yes, sir. If I went through the questions, it would take a couple more rounds, I think. As Senator Specter has pointed out, there are a lot of unanswered questions and a lot of them that you have answered for me—though I may not agree with them, you have answered them, but some I do agree, or at least I am satisfied.
I am concerned—and this is really not addressed to you; it is ad­dressed more to the White House—one of the records that have been put together regarding your record on the circuit court is in­teresting, and I have read it, and I do not know if you approved it, but it points out some pretty good statistics on reversals and how many cases you have handled.
But Judge Bork, can you tell me if any of the majority opinions which you wrote have ever been considered by the Supreme Court? Judge BORK. I do not know, I really do not know. I did not put that stuff together.
Senator DECONCINI. I did not think you did.
Judge BORK. And I did not even read it, because there comes a point in this process when you cannot bear to read anything more about yourself. But I do not know
Senator DECONCINI. I do not think there is. And it is okay. That does not disqualify you by any means. But I think it is most mis­leading on that, because it indicates that so many of your cases have gone up, that you have written something on, and that your opinions have been adopted. But in fact, if I am correct, not one of the cases where you wrote the majority opinion has been consid­ered by the Supreme Court.
Judge BORK. Well, it may be. And one reason for that is a lot of them have been petitions for certiorari, petitions to review my opinions, and they have been denied.
On the other hand, I think it has been pointed out—and these are not my numbers; somebody's numbers—that I have written a number of dissents, and I think in each case
Senator DECONCINI. Yes.
Judge BORK. When I have written a dissent and it
has gone up, the Supreme Court has adopted my position.
Senator DECONCINI. That is correct. And I will go further. Your supporters in that particular piece of the White House, they cite only split decisions, and where there was a dissenting opinion by you. And that is fair enough, but I think it is important for the record to be clear, because I read that, and as I got into it more and more, I found out—at least I think I found out—that none of your majority opinions, which makes it a little bit fooling with sta­tistics, because
Judge BORK. Well, Senator-
Senator DECONCINI. Wait a minute—it indicates that this majority position you have taken has not been adopted by the Court—well, it has not been considered, so it has not had a chance to be adopted, not that it might not be.
Judge BORK. Well, yes. And of course, if they deny certiorari, one supposes they do not find it too outrageous.
Senator DECONCINI. That is right.
Judge BORK. I do not know if any cases in which I participated but did not write the opinion have gone up. I simply do not know.
Senator DECONCINI. And then likewise, just for the record, yes­terday we had that list of 100 law professors. I now have a letter from former Dean Marcus of the University of Arizona—which does not say he opposes you, by the way—and I will put it in the record here, and you will have a chance to see it. It says that he does not support or oppose Judge Bork. And I think it is important that the record be as clear and concise as it can be that Dean Marcus did not want his name used without his permission, al­though he says in the letter, clearly, taking the view that, "It would be presumptuous for me to support or oppose Judge Bork's nomination," and he explains the constitutional reasons.
So without objection, Mr. Chairman, I will ask that it be part of the record. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, it will be entered in the record.
Senator DECONCINI. NOW, Judge Bork, I do have a question that has been raised, not by me, but by one of your colleagues, Judge Gordon, regarding a panel that you sat with with Judge Robb. I only read in the newspaper what some of the clerks said and what your response was. And I would like to turn to that for a moment. It relates, of course, to the opinion in Vander Jagt v. O'Neill. And I am not so much interested in the opinion, because I am really not; I am interested in the problem that is raised here that you may be able to clarify completely as to the ethical standard that is used by judges.
Is it correct to say that, although you had agreed to write a ma­jority-based opinion on numerous reason, it was agreed that the opinion would not be based on standing, as clearly stated in the memorandum from Judge Robb dated March 19, 1982?
Judge BORK. That is entirely true. We were going to—I can de­scribe
Senator DECONCINI. Okay.
Judge BORK. I am sorry.
Senator DECONCINI. NOW, between that memorandum and the time you drafted the opinion, you apparently had a change of heart and decided that the opinion should be based on standing; is that correct?
Judge BORK. That is correct.
Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Now, in September of 1982—as a matter of fact, the 17th, to be exact—you sent your opinion based on the standing issue to Judge Gordon. With that opinion, you did not attach any explanation for your application of the standing reasoning; is that accurate?
Judge BORK. That is accurate. I did not
Senator DECONCINI. I am going to let you answer the whole thing, so you do not have to jump—I just want to lay the case, and then I will be glad to let you have as much time as you want.
Then, a week later, on September 24, 1982, you sent an explana­tion letter to Judge Gordon that you had been notified of Judge Gordon's concern prior to sending the apologetic letter to Judge Gordon.
Had you been notified of Judge Gordon's concerns before you sent that?
Judge BORK. I do not recall.
Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not recall. That is fair enough.
Judge BORK. I do not think I even heard from Judge Gordon until his last letter, sending me his last draft. That is my recollec­tion.
Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Then, next, on October 1, 1982, you forwarded a copy of your letter to Judge Gordon to Judge Robb. Now, is there any reason you let a week go by, or do you recall? I realize that is 7 years or 5 years ago.
Judge BORK. I have no idea. I do not recall.
Senator DECONCINI. That is fair enough. After receiving a copy of your September 17 letter to Judge Gordon, Judge Robb respond­ed by saying he was "surprised" to have your proposed opinion based on standing, and that he could not agree with the reasoning.
In this same letter, Judge Robb suggested that Judge Gordon
prepare an opinion based on something other than standing, as
originally agreed in the conference back in March of 1982. Then further, on October 8, 1982, you sent a letter to both Judge
Robb and Judge Gordon, and in that letter you characterized your
failure to notify Judge Gordon of your decision to write the opinion, based on a different reasoning than originally agreed to, as follows: "Inexcusable. I neglected to write to Judge Gordon about my
change of opinion." End of quote. That was in your letter. Now, it concerns me—the doctrines, we could talk about, but
that really is not necessary—there seems to be some question as to
what took place during the period after you agreed to draft the
opinion and the actual drafting. That is not so much the change of
heart that I have a question with—I think judges are entitled to
change their minds and to try to convince their colleagues on a
panel to change their minds—but rather, the way in which you
communicated this change particularly to Judge Gordon. In your letter of October 8, 1982, you wrote that although you
had spoken to Judge Robb concerning your change in approach,
Judge Robb did not remember speaking to you; did not doubt that
it took place, but was certain that he did not understand what you
say that you had proposed. Now, is that correct, and can you tell me more about really what
took place so I can have a clear understanding? Judge BORK. Yes. And I will be glad, if you wish, to prepare a
written submission on this, because this idea that I would try to
get an opinion through first a panel and its clerks, and then a full
Court and its clerks—because we have a rule that an opinion, after
the panel approves it, has to lie there for 7 days—and if I did
manage to get an opinion through the panel and the clerks and
then the full Court and the clerks, that they would not en bane me
as soon as they found out, makes the whole thing Senator LEAHY. That they would not—I am sorry? Judge BORK. They would not en bane me—to get rid of this opinion. The whole strategy is actually a preposterous suggestion. And
what happened is this—and people remember this—what I said in
the letter of Senator SIMPSON. Could you put that microphone down a little
bit? Judge BORK. I am sorry. Okay. I said in my September 24 letter to Judge Gordon what the fact
was; that as I started on the opinion, I thought it was harder to get
the case out under either the political question doctrine or the
speech or debate clause. And the Supreme Court's opinion in
Valley Forge made it easy to dispose of it on standing grounds.
And in addition to that, we had coming up for en bane rehearing
in our court a challenge to the Senate and the House of Representatives' paying of chaplains. The case demanded that you not pay
chaplains any salary on the grounds it violated the establishment
clause. And in the middle of that case was going to be the political
question doctrine and perhaps the speech and debate clause. And I
did not want to publish a panel opinion taking a hard position on
that, and then the en bane thing comes along and maybe wipes out
the rationale I use in this case.
So my clerk and I—Paul Larkin, his name is—discussed this, and I said to him, and he remembers this, that I was going to go up and talk to Judge Robb about using standing instead. And I did go up, and we had a long talk. And I am told by Judge McKinnon on our Court that Judge Robb's secretary at the time remembers me going up to talk to him about this.
I did talk to him about it, and he agreed with me. Senator DECONCINI. He agreed—excuse me—he agreed that you should change the opinion and do it on standing?
Judge BORK. The standing, yes. I said to him, you know, this Court had a position in Goldwater v. Carter which was vacated by the—I was not on the Court then—which was vacated by the Su­preme Court because it did things on other grounds. But this Court wrote an opinion on standing in Goldwater v. Carter, I think v/hich had a majority of the Court, and I said why don't I use that ration­ale, because it will go by this Court; they will buy it.
And he said all right, and then we had a long talk in his office about his father being on the Court, and some of the mementos he had from that.
I went back and told Paul Larkin that Judge Robb had agreed and we would do it this way. And Judge Gordon was down in Ken­tucky—I should have written him instantly—but I did not think there was going to be a flap about it. I mean, it just seemed to me to be a noncontroversial
Senator DECONCINI. Excuse me. You did not write him why—you just forgot?
Judge BORK. Yes, I just forgot, and it did not occur to me. I did not think it was going to be a big deal. And I was new on the Court. I should have just automatically sent everybody something; I did not.
Senator DECONCINI. Did you make any notes of your discussion with Judge Robb?
Judge BORK. I did not. All I can tell you is that people remember me going up there to talk to him and coming back and saying it is okay.
Then I sent the opinion out, and then I forget whether—maybe one of Judge Gordon's clerks said to my clerk something about it, and maybe I wrote Gordon for that reason; I do not know. But in any event, we went ahead, and I wind up writing a concurring opinion—yes—with them, saying it is a standing case. And they were saying, well, it is really an equitable discretion case.
Now, this equitable discretion concept is one of considerable diffi­culty. It exists nowhere but in our circuit. What it says is if we find that there is standing, then
Senator DECONCINI. I do not need to know the case. My concern is the procedure which you are going through, really. I do not need to go into cases. I guess the question—and you answered it fair enough, that you forgot to advise the third panel member of what you remembered was the change of heart or change of decision on the part of Judge Robb.
Judge BORK. Well, more than that. The third panel member never complained to me about this until the other day. He did not complain to me then; he wrote a letter—never a word that any­thing had been funny about this.
Senator DECONCINI. Well, when you sent the opinion to him, he complained, Judge Gordon, did he not? Judge BORK. Not to me. I do not think I have ever heard from him. No, I have no Senator DECONCINI. He did not accept the opinion. He got hold of
Judge Robb. You did not know that he got hold of Judge Robb? Judge BORK. NO, I did not, I did not. Anyway—I am not sure about that, even, because I do not think
I heard from Judge Robb until after I sent Judge Robb the copy of my letter to Judge Gordon. Well, anyway, this is what I got back from Judge Gordon, with his final draft. He discusses what he has done to the draft, and so forth and so on, and he would appreciate it if he could have my law clerk ring up to work on circulating the opinion and so forth, process the opinion.
And the last paragraph of this letter of December 17th says, "May I take this opportunity of expressing to you my pleasure in sitting with you last March, and the making of your acquaintance, and I wish you and yours a happy and joyous Yuletide season."
That was the only sentiment he expressed to me from then until
now. Senator DECONCINI. That is Gordon, that is Gordon. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator DECONCINI. NOW, isn't it true that on October 5th, 1982,
Judge Robb wrote you and Judge Gordon a memorandum, and in it he said, "Now, I am surprised to have Judge Bork's proposed opin­ion, holding that the plaintiffs are out of court because they have no standing to sue. Although I agree with the results, I regret that I cannot concur in the opinion. I would apply the Riegle theory to this case. The Valley Forge case relies on it, and the proposed opin­ion was not a case of the congressional plaintiff, and I see nothing in it that suggests that the Court would not have approved the ap­plication of the Riegle theory in a congressional plaintiff context."
Doesn't this refute what you said, that Judge Robb had agreed
with you? Judge BORK. NO, it does not at all, Senator, because Senator DECONCINI. Why not? Judge BORK. Well, he did not remember it. And he did not even
deny that we had met and talked. And other people do remember. Senator DECONCINI. Are you familiar with this memorandum? Judge BORK. Yes, I think so. Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Judge BORK. But I called Judge Robb when I got this thing and
said, "What are you doing? I do not mind you changing your posi­tion," because I thought he had changed his position from standing to the other thing. '^Vhat are you doing?" We talked about this. And he said, "If you say we talked about it, I will accept that, but I do not remember it." And that is where it stood.
Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Judge BORK. But that I did talk about it is quite clear from people who are still around, who remember it.
Senator DECONCINI. Judge, let me go to one other quick thing here—I think it will be quick—and that is, you have not been called on as a judge to issue decisions on the first amendment es­tablishment of religion or the free exercise clause; and I understand you have not written a lot about it, although there is a very controversial speech that supposedly you made to the Brookings In­stitute on September 12, 1985, when you discussed the Supreme Court decision in the area.
Are you familiar with the speech?
Judge BORK. Oh, yes.
Senator DECONCINI. Good. You said in part of that speech, "A re­laxation of current, rigidly secularist doctrine would, in the first place, permit some sensible thing to be done," end of quote. And after discussing one particular case, the Aguilar case, you go on to say, quote, "I suspect that the greatest perceived change would be in the re-introduction of some religion into public schools and some greater religious symbols in our public life."
You label this as a political speech, and I will take it as such, and not as a mandate of a judge discussing a case.
After the Brookings speech, there was the incident where Rever­end Kenneth Dean, the pastor of the First Baptist Church of Roch­ester, NY, asked you a question. Reverend Dean, who will be a wit­ness here next week, says that he told you about an embarrass­ment and conflicting experience by an eighth-grade boy who was instructed by his Jewish parents not to read the Bible or lead prayer in classroom devotions dominated by Christians.
And Reverend Dean says in a news article there, that you re­sponded, "Well, I suppose he got over it, didn't he?"
In view of that remark, first of all, is that your remark, and sec­ondly, with the constraints of not commending on how you would decide religious cases, the establishment cases and establishment clause, can you give us some idea of what do you believe the Founding Fathers intended under this clause?
Judge BORK. Well, I want to go back a moment, Senator. I have not had much experience with this, and in that speech, I said things no more than most people are saying—I mean, scholars in the field, and so forth.
And you referred to it as a political speech. It was not a political speech. It was
Senator DECONCINI. Excuse me. It was not in the sense, I do not believe, a speech in the sense that you were giving it as a judge. That is why I said political. I meant it was a non-official judge's conference of any nature-—
Judge BORK. NO. It was religious leaders. They had religious leaders. And Mr. Warren Cikins, who was the head of the seminar program
Senator DECONCINI. I was only trying to make the distinction that you were not standing there as a judge, giving a speech; you were standing there as an individual, which you had the right to do—maybe I am incorrect, but that is how I read the context of the speech in the Times Union.
Judge BORK. Well, I discussed this thing, but I am not—in the first place, I do not know that much about the framers' intentions in the area of the establishment clause, and
Senator DECONCINI. Well, first, do you remember the exchange with Reverend Kenneth Dean?
Judge BORK. No, I do not, and I am certain that I did not say a thing -like that about "a Jewish boy will get over it." There has been some discussion of my relationship
Senator DECONCINI. If Reverend Dean said that you did say that, your answer to that next week is going to be that he is mistaken? Judge BORK. I certainly am. I do not know what I said, but if I said anything—it must have been in front of a group. And I earlier introduced into the record, Senator, letters—somebody also said
that I endorsed school prayer. I do not know what was going on that night, but I did not endorse school prayer.
I never taught those cases; I never really thought about the prob­lem, and I certainly did not wait until I became a judge and go over and talk to an audience about endorsing school prayer.
But I have here two letters that were introduced—I will not read them all through, but I have here two letters. One is from Mr.
Warren Cikins, who was the head of the seminar program and who
kept notes throughout the evening—and he still has his notes—and
Mr. Cikins, I should note for this purpose, describes himself as a
devout Jew—and he says he finds no reference to any specific Supreme Court decision, but only an expression of broad concepts and principles.
"I find no opinion expressed by the Judge on the issue of school prayer," and so forth. And these letters are in the record, so I will not read them all to you.
Senator DECONCINI. I am sure that, without objection, they will be put in the record. Judge BORK. And then there is a letter from Rabbi Joshua Haberman, who was there, from the Washington Hebrew Congregation. This one was printed in the Washington Post. Rabbi Haberman was sitting right in front of me as I spoke from the podium,
and he said if he had nothing but the Post's account of the evening's discussion, "I would draw entirely wrong conclusions about
Judge Bork's views on Church and State issues. Your reporter was
not present at the meeting. I was. As a rabbi, with a strong commitment to the separation of Church and State, I would have been
greatly alarmed if Judge Bork had expressed any tendency to move
away from our constitutional guarantee of religious freedom and equality. I heard nothing of the sort."
Senator DECONCINI. Fine. Without objection, that letter will appear in the record. Judge BORK. All right. But I wish you would go on, Senator, and
read—because I like—it is so laudatory. I like the rest of it.
Senator DECONCINI. Let me ask you about the establishment
clause, Judge. I know you have not taken up cases on it. What kind
of activities by the Government were meant to be prohibited, in
your judgment, by the framers?
Judge BORK. Oh, I think anything—my judgment—I have to be
very careful about this, because I have not got a worked-out posi­tion.
Senator DECONCINI. YOU what?
Judge BORK. I have not got a worked-out position. I never taught those cases when I was a constitutional law professor; I never
wrote about them. I have read a couple of books since then, but I
have not got a worked-out position.
Senator DECONCINI. Well, but it is hard for me to imagine, Judge
Bork, with your intellectual capacity and the experience that you
have had, that you have not thought about this clause and the first
amendment, having done all you have done. But if that is your answer, that is your answer.
Judge BORK. Well, let me say this. I think it is clearly important that religion and government be kept out of each other, for the good of both religion and government.
Now, that gets you into very difficult cases about whether a city can put a trailer outside a parochial school and have the children
come out for remedial reading, and so forth. That is the kind of—
that is where we are operating, on the margin. I mean, there is no
Senator DECONCINI. Would you apply a strict standard, or a rea­sonable standard, or what would you apply there—or have you thought about it?
Judge BORK. NO, I do not think it is a strict standard or a reason­able standard. I think the question is, given what we know of the
ratifiers' intent, and given the way the precedent has developed, you have to make adjustments at the margin in every case.
Senator DECONCINI. Okay. Judge Bork, I only say this to you be­cause I think you have devoted a lot of time to this, and it is very
important to you, as it is to me. I cannot think of a more important
decision that Congress makes than confirmation of all judges, but
certainly, the Supreme Court judges. And I welcome any written
responses you want after you look at this record, because the equal
protection clause bothers me a great deal. We have gone over it and over it, and I am not going to go over it again.
The right of privacy concerns me. You have responded in some areas, particularly the Dronenberg case yesterday. I was very concerned about those 10 pages of what I consider philosophizing. I accept your answer to that, that they were taken up, all of those points. I have not read that, but I have no reason to dispute you.
Your explanation of the firing or discharge of Archibald Cox, al­though I do not agree with that, I have no reason to dispute what you said there.
But I am greatly concerned, as has been expressed by a number of people on this panel, this committee, and the people that I
talked to, about your inability to find a right of privacy as it relates to the Connecticut case that we have gone over and over here,
either in the ninth amendment or something. And with the outstanding intellectual capacity that you have and experience, I find
that very difficult, but I accept that that is your position—and also
on the equal protection clause. I say that to you because it is up to you whether or not you want
to rehash this in writing for me. That is not an assignment, by any
means, and I do not want to leave it with you that that is going to
make the difference. But I am very concerned about it, and I mean
that sincerely. I feel some emotion tied to it. I have two daughters;
one is a doctor, and one is going to be a lawyer. And if they were
truck drivers in heavy equipment, I would feel the same way.
I want to be satisfied not only for my daughters, but for all
women, that they would have really equal opportunity before the
eyes of the nominee. And you have not convinced me of that, al­though you have gone over it a great deal, and if there is anything
you want to add to the record, I will be more than happy to consid­er it.
I do not make these judgments on one, single issue. I have said that many times. I would not vote against you or would not vote for you because you happen to come down on a side that I like, or disagree with my own value system. This disturbs me, the equal protection, and
Judge BORK. May I ask, Senator, why it is you think there is any—I mean, I have a mother and a wife and a daughter, too—and
why it is you think that I might not protect women under the equal protection clause?
Senator DECONCINI. Well, I find it very difficult, coming from where you have come from, your very strong views as to the 14th
amendment early on; your acceptance a few days ago, the first
time that I found that you do apply it to women—that is very positive. I do not say that critically. Although some will hold you suspect for that, I say, hey, that is positive. Here is a jurist and an
academic, a professor, who is willing to move and expand; that is good.
Then we get into this argument of the standards that you apply, and the fact that you—and you cite Justice Stevens—have come up
with something new. That concerns me, because this is such a fundamental belief that I have in the equal protection clause as it ap­plies to women.
I am worried about you have a standard out here of reasonable­ness where all the other judges, including Rehnquist in a couple of
his dissents, used the rational basis, or the intermediate basis, or on race cases, the strict basis.
Judge BORK. It comes out the same way, but I think it makes more sense then explaining why the amendment applies to all
people. But on this, you know, I have been teaching those cases in
which they applied the equal protection clause to women before,
and I have never criticized them, never complained about them.
The only trouble with them is they applied the lowest level of scrutiny they could find, so that they had these ridiculously discrimina­tory statutes, which I criticized in class.
There was the case when they say a woman can't be licensed as a bartender unless her husband owns the place. They applied the
equal protection clause, but they upheld the distinction. Now, I
never complained about applying the clause. All I ever complained about was upholding the distinction.
Senator DECONCINI. Fine. I just had to share that with you as we proceed with these hearings and deliberate, and I thank you, Judge
Bork, for your willingness to rehash some of these things for some
of us who haven't been to law school in a long time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. We will recess, Judge, for 5 minutes and, with
you and I and the ranking member, we will work out the remainder of this schedule to, hopefully, everyone's satisfaction.
We will recess for 5 minutes.
 
The CHAIRMAN. Judge, you and I and the ranking member and
others have conferred outside, and I am about to announce something that is going to get me in more trouble with the news media than I have already gotten into this week, and that is that we will be in tomorrow, but here is the game plan.
Tonight we will go forward with the Senator from New Hamp­shire, who has 10 minutes; the Senator from Vermont, who has 30 minutes; and the Senator from Wyoming, with 3 minutes. We will then adjourn for the evening.
Although you and I said we would come in at 10, I would prefer at 10:30, if you don't mind, so the train will get me down here on time. That's okay?
Judge BORK. All right, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. We will come in at 10:30 tomorrow. Upon coming in tomorrow, we will then go to the Senator from Alabama, who has 30 minutes; then we will go to the Senator from Pennsylvania, who has 1 hour and 30 minutes; then we will go to the Chairman, who will have a half hour at his discretion to yield to anyone he wishes to yield it to or use it himself. The questioning will then end.
Senator THURMOND. What about our side? You said, the "Chair­man."
The CHAIRMAN. I still think of you as the Chairman, Mr. Chair­man. I apologize. You are always my Chairman. I mean to say the ranking member. Thirty minutes will be yielded to—will be in the control of the ranking member, Senator Thurmond, to assign any way he wishes.
At the end of Senator Thurmond's 30 minutes, the questioning, to your great relief, will be over, at which time you will have as much time as you want, but I understand you want about 5 min­utes or thereabouts, but do not feel constrained by that, whatever amount of time you want to make a statement, which I understand you would like to make.
Then the Senator from South Carolina wishes to have 3 minutes to make a statement. And although I don't plan on using it, I would like to reserve up to 10 minutes. No more than 10 minutes.
At the conclusion of my two, three—maybe not
Senator KENNEDY. Ten minutes.
The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Massachusetts would like 10 minutes tomorrow. To question or to Senator KENNEDY. TO question. The CHAIRMAN. SO prior to us going to the half hour, finishing
off with the Senator from South Carolina, we will have 10 minutes, the Senator from Massachusetts; we will go to a half hour, the Sen­ator from South Carolina. Questioning will end. Five or more or whatever you want for your statement. Three minutes for the statement from the ranking member, and up to—I don't plan on using it—but up to 10 minutes for me. That will end your presence here before the committee, and we will begin with the public wit­nesses on Monday.
Senator THURMOND. Not subject to recall by unanimous consent.
The CHAIRMAN. Well, it is hard to get a unanimous consent agreement since others are not here, and I have no intention of re­calling you. But I am not going to seek a unanimous consent re­quest for that at this point. I assure you I have no desire whatso­ever, much I have learned to enjoy your company, to ask you to
come back barring something extraordinary that would happen in the public witness list.
So I think I can—as a matter of fact, I am going to be so bold as to suggest I will speak for the Democrats on that. The ranking member speaks for the Republican. That is the deal, and if you can hang on for what will amount to another 43 minutes tonight, we will finish for tonight—30 plus 10 plus 3.
So I now yield to the Senator from New Hampshire for his 10 minutes tonight.Senator HUMPHREY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I doubt I will need even that much time.
First, the Senator from Arizona raised some questions about the significance of whether or not some of the D.C. Circuit Court cases reaching the Supreme Court on appeal were authored by others than Judge Bork. I am not going to go into that further because, frankly, I think it is not a substantial point.
But I would like to put into the record 8 or 10 pages, Mr. Chair­man.
The CHAIRMAN. Sorry. I beg your pardon. Without objection.
Senator HUMPHREY. Thank you.
Senator HUMPHREY. Mr. Chairman, at this hour as is usual there
is a certain mellowness and camaraderie in the air, but that hasn't
been the case at other times in this day or in other days, and there
are certain things that have transpired that I want to address as
my last part in this hearing today. The Senator from Massachusetts in his summation noted that
the record speaks for itself, and indeed it does. It is unfortunate,
however, that some are so deaf they cannot hear the record speak.
It is unfortunate that some are so deaf they cannot hear what the
record of Robert Bork the Solicitor General and Robert Bork the
Judge says.And when that record speaks and is heard, if anyone is listening,
it says unequivocally that Robert Bork is a temperate, reasonable
man. A man it turns out who has decided as a judge in favor of
minority persons and women in 88 percent of the civil rights cases
which have come before him. The record says that Robert Bork is a
man of fairness and decency, of intellect and intellectual honesty.
It is unfortunate that some refuse to listen to the record, refuse to
listen to the most relevant of all possible testimony about what
kind of judge, what kind of a Justice Robert Bork would make;
namely, his exemplary and impeccable record as a judge on our nation's second most important court. Instead they insist almost exclusively on exhuming his writings
as a college professor. Let me say something about those writings.
They were available. Those writings, same writings, were available
when this committee and the Senate scrutinized Robert Bork 5
years ago for the judge on the DC Circuit Court of Appeals and
when this body voted, without dissent, to confirm him. Those writings were available then. My point is this: If today those writings can be claimed to prove
that Robert Bork is an enemy of equality before the law for all citizens, irrespective of race or sex, then the same claim could have
been made on the same basis 5 years ago when he was before this
committee the last time. But no such claim was raised. That is very
peculiar, isn't it? Very odd. Especially in light of the extraordinary
parallel between this hearing for Robert Bork and that of Thur-
good Marshall in 1967. I saw parallel because, like Robert Bork,
Thurgood Marshall had served as both Solicitor General and a circuit court judge. Now, Mr. Chairman, let me quote our distinguished colleague,
the Senator from Massachusetts, from his statement before this
committee on that occasion; that is, in the 1967 hearing on Thur-
good Marshall. These are the words of the Senator from Massachusetts:
"Mr. Chairman, I would like to add one final thought"—his
words in part, of course. "Mr. Chairman, I would like to add one
final thought. Judge Marshall has undergone nominations hearings
before this committee twice in the last 5 years just like Robert
Bork. Twice in the last 5V2 years and on the first occasion he was
nominated to the second circuit and on the second he was nominated to Solicitor General. In both of those hearings this committee heard ample proof of his fitness for high legal office, and his record subsequently has only added to his qualifications. I, therefore, think we can move expeditiously ahead with his confirmation."
I ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, that that passage be
placed in the record—in the transcript. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, it will be placed in the record.
Senator HUMPHREY. And the same thing can be said for Robert Bork. He has been twice before this committee, found fit, and, if anything, his record has only been embellished since the last time he appeared before this committee.
I find it peculiar, indeed, that some who voted for Judge Bork 5 years ago seem to have amnesia today about their vote. But they did it, and as they say. the record speaks for itself. This inconsist­ency disturbs me because it does violence not only to Judge Bork and his family; it does violence, it does an injustice to our country.
Because, really, it pollutes and it politicizes the confirmation process, a process which relies so heavily on good faith and biparti­sanship. Yes, politics. And that is the only possible explanation of the self-evident inconsistency before us. Unless you can believe the amnesia theory, that is, you have got to see it as politics. After all, Judge Bork's writings were available 5 years ago and they haven't changed in the last 5 years. Politicizing the confirmation process is a very sad way, indeed, to celebrate the 200th anniversary of our Constitution,
Judge Bork, good luck to you. Chief Justice Warren Burger indeed was right when he described you as the best nominee for the Supreme Court in the last 50 years. By virtue of your superb qualifications, you deserve confirmation; and I believe that you will be confirmed because I cannot believe that the Senate will abide in politicizing the confirmation process. That process is far too impor­tant to sacrifice to short-term political expediency.
I relinquish the balance of my time. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. Judge, I just, after all I have gone through in saying when we
would start tomorrow, I didn't realize that I had a—this running for President, you are not home very much; and I promised my son I would be at his football game tomorrow at 10:30. Would you mind if we didn't start till 12:00? That make a difference to you? That is a heck of a thing to say in public.
Judge BORK. NO, that wouldn't make a difference, Senator. The CHAIRMAN. I mean the same time constraints. Or 11:30? Judge BORK. 11:30 is all right. Twelve o'clock is all right. I was
kind of hoping to see the Boston College game. The CHAIRMAN. What time is that? Senator LEAHY. Can we get a little side bet on this?  The CHAIRMAN. I tell you what, we can work out a deal here. Judge BORK. NO, that is all right. The CHAIRMAN. Seriously, I don't want to Judge BORK. I will tape the game. The CHAIRMAN. Well, then do any of you fellows object to us not
starting till 12? Senator HATCH. I don't know about Senator Thurmond. Oh, here
he is. The CHAIRMAN. DO you mind if we don't start till 12? Senator THURMOND. That is all right. Yes. Judge BORK. Can we have the same closing? The CHAIRMAN. Yes, same everything. Same everything. Twelve
o'clock. I may be a half hour late, I will have someone start it. I truly appreciate it, Judge. Thank you. I will yield now to Senator Leahy.
747
Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At one time I always
liked to make those games. I, one time, came to a soccer game out
in McLean. My young son and the young son of now Justice Scalia
was playing. It was a cold day and the kids were playing. The two
of us were sitting there kind of muttering a bit. He mentioned he
had driven a few miles to get there. I told him that I had started
out that day in Ankara, Turkey, to get there for that soccer game. The soccer game, fortunately, the team of our sons won.
But it is important to be there, and I mention that only as a prel­ude. That same son with the rest of our family is—he is finishing
high school in Vermont and the family is up there, so I will not be
here tomorrow, Judge Bork. I will be in Vermont. I have been
down here now for the last 10 days. I also want to get home and
see my family. And I hope this does wrap up soon so that you can have the rest of the weekend with yours.
You know, I said at the outset of this hearing about the rather unique character of a confirmation hearing. I said you might find it
part trial by ordeal and part like a graduate seminar in constitu­tional law, and I think my prediction was accurate.
But I also predicted that the Committee's examination of you would be long, and I am sure you are ready to agree to that; that it
would be thorough; but I also felt it would be fair and serious, and
here again I think I was right. We have heard some statements
today and, in fact, early in the hearing to the effect that the hearing had taken on some characteristics of an inquisition. Well, I have to object to that.
I have been here throughout the hearings, not every single minute of it, but most of it. In fact, I think I have been here probably more than anybody else, or as much as any member of this
committee, and I haven't seen an inquisition. I have heard some
repetitious questions. I have heard a great many leading questions, but I haven't heard any unfair questions.
As far as repetition is concerned, I think that I should say in de­fense of the committee that we have heard quite a few statements
from you, sir, on critical issues in this proceeding that we had not
heard before—not in your confirmation hearings or in your prolific
writings or speeches or your judicial decisions. And every Senator,
of course, has to look at that and judge for himself what weight to
give to this new information, to decide whether it was expected or
unexpected, but I wanted to mention that fact because I think that
goes to why you have had to answer sometimes the same questions
more than once. Perhaps each of us see it a little bit differently,
each one of us has a particular interest and we would follow up on
it. And so, you know, sometimes the rhetoric about inquisition may
inspire the troops, but I don't think people who have followed these
hearings closely and attentively would agree with that characterization. They haven't seen an inquisition. They have seen a committee—an historic committee—of the U.S. Senate performing one
of its most useful duties under the Constitution.
I think we have done it with seriousness and dignity, but also I
might say with a firm and fair hand wielding the gavel. But they
have also seen a nominee responding forthrightly and willingly in
detail to the inquiries of members of this committee, and I com­mend you for that. And also I would commend your wife and your
sons and your daughter, who sat patiently throughout this, and I
know that has been a long time for them and I think that you, sir,
should be very proud and appreciative of them, and I am sure you
are. Judge BORK. I am, indeed, Senator. Senator LEAHY. NOW what I would like to do, if I might, is pick
up at a place where I left off yesterday, go back again to the area
of free speech, to a concept you have expressed frequently in your
writings, and that is the idea that the local community should have
the right to suppress speech that doesn't meet the legal test of obscenity on the grounds that the speech is harmful to the community's moral standards. And, in your 1979 University of Michigan speech, you said, on
page 15, "The Court tends to assume that there is not a problem if
willing adults indulge a taste for pornography in a theater whose
outside advertising does not offend the squeamish. The assumption
is wrong. The consequences of such private indulgence may have
public consequences far more unpleasant than industrial pollution.
The attitudes, taste and moral values inculcated do not stay behind
in the theater. A change in moral environment—in social attitudes
toward sex, marriage, duties toward children and the like—may as
surely be felt as a harm as the possibility of physical violence. The
Court has never explained why what the public feels to be a harm
may not be counted." And you made similar comments. Now that quotation uses the word "pornography" and I know
you have discussed here the interchanging of it, but, as lawyers, we
know that pornography is one thing, obscenity is quite another.
The Supreme Court spoke to that distinction. That was the 1959 case of Kingsley Corporation v. Regents of the University of New York and I believe that may have a target of some of your speeches. The State of New York had tried to ban a film, to quote from
the Court's decision, because "the whole thing of this motion picture is the presentation of adultery as a desirable, acceptable and
proper pattern of behavior." Now, there was no contention the film was obscene. It was not
banned under an obscenity statute. The Supreme Court in a nine
to nothing decision held the first amendment prevented the State
from banning this film "because this picture advocates an idea—
that adultery under certain circumstances may be proper behavior," and then went on to say, "the first amendment's basic guarantee is the freedom to advocate ideas." Now, that was sort of a long lead in, not because I am up here to
advocate or promote films advocating adultery but to follow up on
an answer you gave to Senator Specter. You told him on Wednesday that you believed that the Supreme Court is the ultimate arbiter of whether a work is obscene and if a local community tried to
ban works that were not obscene, the courts should prevent that
from happening; is that correct? Judge BORK. That is basically correct. Senator LEAHY. And that is consistent with Kingsley, but it did
not seem consistent, to me, with your University of Michigan
speech. Would you agree?
Judge BORK. Well, no, Senator. It is inconsistent only in the
sense that I used the word "pornography." But as I have told you, I
have been using that interchangeably with "obscenity." I agree
with you that I should not have done that. It is not as precise as it
should be. But I was talking about pornography which amounts to
obscenity in this speech. Senator LEAHY. Let me go to another one. A very similar question is raised by your repeated criticism of the Supreme Court case
Cohen v. California. That is one of those—I think we referred to it
as a Chaucerian language, modern adaptation. Judge BORK. Yes. An Anglo Saxon term. Senator LEAHY. AS an Anglo Saxon term and perhaps recognized
more universally than you might like. You have written about that
case a number of times. In fact, you eloquently, I thought, put it in
a speech to the Justice and Society seminar in Aspen, CO. You said
that, I guess, the defendant in this case had worn on the back of
his jacket a slogan, and I will quote you, that "suggested that the
reader perform a most implausible physical act with the draft
law," close quote. And in fact, having done that, he was convicted of disorderly conduct. The Supreme Court in that opinion by Justice Harlan struck
down the conviction. Justice Harlan said the first amendment prevents government from distinguishing among words that people
might find offensive, prohibiting some, permitting others. You sharply criticized that decision. The decision had asked how
is one to distinguish this from any other offensive words, or how
can the government constitutionally pick and chose among words
without infringing free speech. And as I understand your Aspen
speech and several others, you said they can pick and choose by the
common sense of the community. And here, again, you believe the
community ideas of morality should prevail over a first amendment protection of free speech. In fact, on page 18 of your Michigan speech when you discuss the
Cohen case, you said, ' Far from protecting such speech, it"—the
first amendment—"offers additional reason for its suppression." Again, a lengthy lead-in judge, only because I am wondering if
this is inconsistent with what you told Senator Specter about the
role of the Federal courts to protect non-obscene free speech regardless of the views of even the majority of the local community
which might find the speech offensive. Judge BORK. NO; I stated, and I still state, that in order to protect the first amendment guarantees of free speech, the Court has
to define what obscenity is and it may not allow a community to
override that. I object to Cohen v. California. I have here my Francis Boyer lecture on this matter, and what I said was—and I disagreed with Justice Harlan on two grounds. He said: "The principle contended for by the State seems inherently boundless. How is one to distinguish this from any other offensive word?"
I then said: "One might as well say that the negligence standard
of tort is inherently boundless, for how is one to distinguish the
reckless driver from the safe one? The answer in both cases is by
the common sense of the community. Now, the common sense of
the community, I take it, is shared by the Supreme Court—wheth86-974 0-89-26
er this is obscenity or not. Almost all judgments in law are ones of
degree and the law—not the community—the law does not flinch
from such judgments except when, as in the case of morals, it seriously doubts the community's right to define harms." Then I went on to complain about Justice Harlan's second rationale where he said—these are my words—apparently thinking
the observation decisive, he said, and I quote him: "One man's vulgarity is another's lyric." And then I said, on that ground it is difficult to see how law on
any subject can be permitted to exist because he said Senator LEAHY. HOW law on? Judge BORK. On any subject can exist, because he is saying that
if somebody regards it as good, how can the rest of us say it is not.
Well, we can say that about obscenity, I think. We can say that
about theft. We can say it about all kinds of things and the fact
that somebody thinks it is all right does not mean you cannot have
law about it. Senator LEAHY. But the courts have ruled on the question of ob­scenity and I read your analogy about the reckless driver. But can
you really use that analogy, because in speech we are talking about
a First Amendment right. We are not talking about a constitutional right in tort law. Not in that sense. Judge BORK. NO. Senator LEAHY. We are not talking about a constitutional right
to drive recklessly. Judge BORK. NO, we are not. Senator LEAHY. But do we have a constitutional right to speak
recklessly?Judge BORK. We have a constitutional right to speak recklessly, but the Supreme Court has recognized that obscenity violates that.
I mean, obscenity is not protected. I think in this case the Supreme
Court allowed obscenity on two grounds that I think were inadequate.Now, interestingly enough Senator, later, in the Pacifica case the
Court said the Federal Communications Commission could take
away a station's license—I think that was what they did to them,
or at least suspend them or something of that sort—when a comedian was allowed to say a string of obscenities over the air. And I
think one of the obscenities was the same one involved in the
Cohen v. California case. Senator LEAHY. Are those not, though, talking in the—under the
FCC law we are also talking about public airwaves, publicly
owned?
Judge BORK. AS a matter of fact, I think the man arrested in Cohen v. California was walking into a public building, namely a
courthouse, with this obscenity on his jacket. Senator LEAHY. YOU understand, my question, though, is if we say that the common sense of the community is going to pick out
what words can be used or not, again, are we not saying then the
community's ideas of morality are going to prevail over our first
amendment protection for free speech? If I could just pull it a bit
further in going back to your negligent driver, there we let a jury,
for example, determine whether there is negligence or not. There are certain obscenity things where we make the ruling as a matter of law by the Court.
Judge BORK. Well, even in the negligent driver case, Senator, if a jury found that there had been negligent driving when the judge
knew very well that there had not and that there was no basis for
the verdict, he would set it aside. But in this case there is nothing
in my writing to suggest that any community can override the
guarantees of the first amendment. No community can override
any guarantee anywhere in the Constitution, and no community can override the powers given to Congress in the Constitution.
That is not the way the Constitution operates and I have never said otherwise. And here I said the law does not flinch from such
judgments. The question of whether this is an obscene word is, in
the first instance, for the community. It must decide whether its
obscenity law applies to this word. Then the Court must decide
whether it is obscene within the meaning of the first amendment
case law. And if it is not obscene within the meaning of the first amendment case law, then the speech is protected.
I have no problem with that. I have never said anything to the contrary.Senator LEAHY. Well, Judge, you have answered my questions a
great deal, now over an hour's worth on first amendment free
speech questions. Senator Specter has followed up a number of
those, you have answered him, and then I have followed up on what Senator Specter said.
So you have had a lot of chances to think about the subject during this week. Do you still feel as critical about the Cohen case
today as you did when you spoke at Aspen in 1985? Judge BORK. Well, when was this? Because I may have said it more recently even. But I feel that the reasons given by Justice
Harlan, that is, how can anyone tell what is obscene and what is
not—which the law assumes it can in a case like Pacifica and elsewhere—I feel that reason is not adequate and I feel that statement
that one man's vulgarity is another's lyric is not adequate to pro­tect an obscenity.
I feel about that precisely the same way as I did when I gave the Boyer lecture. Senator LEAHY. Thank you. This morning, in response to Senator Thurmond, you summarized much of your testimony throughout
this hearing about some important doctrines of constitutional law, and I found that summary very interesting and I suspect all of us are going to go back and read and re-read it as we go through this.
But you described these doctrines as now firmly part of our law, that whatever theoretical challenges might be available to them, it
is too late for any judge to tear them up. I think most, or I would
assume everybody here agrees with that. But among the doctrines
you listed, some you have characterized in your writings—in fact,
in your discussions with me—as too firmly embedded in our law to
tear up.
For example, the expansive interpretation of the commerce
clause, the legal tender cases that authorize the printing of paper
money. We all agree that if you go back and suddenly say, wait a
minute, that is wrong, then, of course, you would have to have a new Supreme Court decision saying, for instance, plastic has taken
over for it.
Judge BORK. All right. Senator LEAHY. But nobody questions that. I mean, that is well
settled. But then there are some doctrines in this category which
you sharply criticize in your writings, but that you characterized at
this hearing, and I think in some instances perhaps for the first
time, or at least the first time I have heard it, as too late to tear
up.Let met go down through a couple of those if I might. They include the prevailing free speech doctrine, including the cases on advocacy of law violation culminating in Brandenburg v. Ohio, and
the extension of first amendment protection of speech that has
nothing to do with the political process. They include the expansion of the equal protection clause to cover sex discrimination and
other types of discrimination. At least you agree in general with
the results that have been reached although you would have taken
a somewhat different route to arrive there. I do not want to go out so far here that you do not have a chance
to come back. Am I correct so far? Have I characterized your testimony correctly so far? Judge BORK. About the Brandenburg and the equal protection
clause covering gender?Senator LEAHY. Yes. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator LEAHY. NOW, what I am unclear about is your testimony
on the cases based on a constitutional right to privacy in matters
relating to procreation, child rearing and the like. And there we
have some decisions that you have criticized in the strongest terms
over many years. Sometimes you have criticized them as unprincipled, intellectually empty, utterly specious, in at least one instance
I believe, unconstitutional. Judge BORK. I must learn, Senator, to begin saying, "on the other
hand. Senator LEAHY. YOU should know, of course, that none of us
would ever resort to rhetoric that we would then chew on later. I
even had my mother tell me things. She reads the Congressional
Record and she has even referred to it and said, did you really say
that? But let me ask you this. Would you agree or disagree with this
proposition: that the cases establishing a constitutional right to privacy in these matters have become part of our law, and that whatever theoretical challenges may be available to them, it is too late
for the Supreme Court to tear them up?
Judge BORK. Senator, I have, I think, rather consistently testified
that I am not going to answer that question because that is a
highly controversial matter. I have consistently testified if a case
came back that I would say to the lawyer, can you derive in some
other fashion than emanations and penumbras a right of privacy
from the Constitution that has some limits, some contours to guide
the judge?
If you cannot, can you find a narrower right that covers your
case—whatever the case is—and root it in the Constitution? And if
you cannot do that, let's discuss stare decisis and whether this is the kind of case that should be overruled. And I have listed the factors that one would consider in deciding whether a case should be
overruled. And I cannot go any further than that. I think that is the best I can do.
Senator LEAHY. But what about Griswold, Judge? Let's back up there just a tad if we might. You know, as has been said by many
before me, democracy is a terrible system of government, except it
is the best we have. And our own system of government with the
three branches of government has to be one of the most inefficient, unwieldy forms of government, but it is by far the best.
Take the average person. They see a legislature that may go off and do quirky things for whatever political reasons, whether it is
the national legislature or a State legislature. And they see an ex­ecutive perhaps indifferent to their wishes as they see them. So they always look to that one body, the Court, that seems more in­dependent than the other two put together, less swayed by the pas­sions of politics or the passions of the moment, and they go to it.
We go back to the law in Griswold, and the people say that is a crazy law. We all agree on that. Except, as Senator DeConcini has
pointed out, and I certainly from my experience as a prosecutor
can well concur, you sometimes find prosecutors who will take a
look at a crazy law and say, for whatever reason, I am bringing
some charges on that, and then all of a sudden that crazy law that
we all chuckled about becomes very real to some man or woman
when the indictment is handed down or the information is issued and the police officer is at the door.
And so where do the people go? They go to the Court. And in the case of Griswold, you are sitting on a court reviewing that. I understand and accept what you say about the penumbra of privacy and so on. But suppose they do not have a stare decisis, and suppose they do not have some other theory. What do you do? You say, look, I am sorry; that is a crazy law but you just bought the radish.
Judge BORK. Senator, the fact is, I have said from the beginning that the mere fact that a law is outrageous is not enough to make
it unconstitutional. If the statute in Griswold had ever been enforced against a married couple, or any couple, I think there might
have been a very good chance it would be an invalid conviction because there is no fair warning. Nobody ever applied the law that
way. If they had applied the law that way, the law would have been repealed instantly.
But passing that, merely the fact that it is a dumb law gives the Court no additional power because there is no statement in the
Constitution that no State shall make a dumb law. You referred to
the fact that when people are dissatisfied with legislatures and executives, they always look to the courts. It is also true that there is
a great deal of dissatisfaction with the courts in this country.
So that I do not think that it is fair to say that the courts are the
only body of government which the people trust. Some people do. A
lot of people do not.
Senator LEAHY. Judge, we could probably go around and around
and wrap ourselves in some kind of penumbra here doing it, but
you have answered this question a number of times.
Let me just sort of close in this area. You say in the privacy area
that you are not willing to take this as a kind of settled area of law, certainly not like the cases about currency. You are perfectly
willing to accept those cases, obviously, because we as a nation
have accepted that idea. So you see—am I stating your position correctly to say you see those as entirely different? Judge BORK. Well, I see the privacy cases in any particular con­text—I mean, it has been applied in a variety of ways—as still controversial cases. The Court is still divided about it. The people are
still divided about it. It remains a live controversy in a way, of
course, the legal tender cases do not. I would like to point out once more that the Constitution explicitly protects many important aspects of privacy—the first amendment, fourth amendment, fifth amendment and so forth—so it is
not a right of privacy I am opposed to. It is a generalized undefined
right of privacy that is not drawn from any constitutional provision. Maybe it can be, but I have not seen it done yet. Senator LEAHY. YOU would say that the law is far more settled in the area of first amendment that we have spoken of? Judge BORK. Oh, yes. There are hundreds of decisions in that
area. Senator LEAHY. And equal protection? Judge BORK. And equal protection. Senator LEAHY. But this area you see as still a moving area, very
controversial? Judge BORK. It seems to be. Senator LEAHY. Judge, I might say that in some areas we agree
and some areas we disagree, but I have sat in an awful lot of confirmation hearings and you have sat there and answered and answered and answered. And I applaud you for it. Others will be asking you questions, and then we will spend days
going back through the record and dissecting it once again. But I
appreciate the fact that each question I have asked you have come
back with an answer and I thank you for that. Judge BORK. Thank you, Senator. You mentioned that we may disagree on some issues. I think that is inevitable. Reasonable men
and women will differ on issues that are still current. There
happen to be strong arguments on both sides of these questions. If
there were not, they would not be issues. If there were not, there
would not be arguments, and indeed if there were not, there would
not be cases. Senator LEAHY. Judge, no nominee to the Supreme Court or any
other court could be so molded to fit in a way to agree with everybody up and down this table. There is no person, a nominee for
anything, including sainthood, that could fit this group, let me tell
you that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Right on the money, Senator. Senator Simpson has 3 minutes. Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, I thank you. I should have submitted this to our chairman, but I think it
would be important to have, Mr. Chairman. Ask Judge Bork to
submit in writing the answers to that Judge Gordon matter on the
Vander Jagt v.O'Neill. The CHAIRMAN. Can you do that, Judge?
Judge BORK. I would like to do that because there is really more
evidence there than I can keep getting at orally. The CHAIRMAN. NO problem. The record will be open as long as it
takes for you to do that. Judge BORK. All right.
Senator SIMPSON. Then, Mr. Chairman, we had a very dramatic presentation this morning by Senator Metzenbaum of a telegram from a woman who was involved in the lead case, the sterilization case. And the lady sent the telegram. We found now this evening, or this afternoon, that she—this is Betty J. Riggs—was contacted approximately 2 weeks ago by an organization requesting that she do a TV ad opposing your nomination. She refused to do that.
She was contacted today, September 18th, at approximately 1:00
p.m. by her attorney, Joan Bertin, an ACLU representative out of New York, as well as her attorney in the Cyanamid case. Ms. Bertin requested that she send a telegram to the Senate Judiciary Committee. Ms. Bertin then prepared the text of the telegram for Ms. Riggs and Ms. Riggs sent the telegram from Harrisville, West Virginia, rather than Parrisville, but she actually lives in West Virginia.
She does agree with the statement as prepared by her attorney and Ms. Bertin advised Ms. Riggs that she would not be contacted by anyone else concerning the matter. However, she stated—that is, Ms. Riggs stated—that she has already received calls from the press. She does not know whether anyone had contacted Ms. Bertin who requested that the telegram be sent.
Well, I think that is offensive conduct for a lawyer. It was called in my day, solicitation. It is an example of the ends pursued and I think such activity is not attractive.
So I want to get that in the record, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator SIMPSON. Then, finally, we have been very helpful in trying to present to you—and you have been totally courteous with
us—but we have asked again and again for a list of witnesses so
that we might prepare ourselves as well as the people who are opposed to Judge Bork have prepared themselves. If we are going to have Lawrence Tribe here—Professor Tribe—
then we want to have an opportunity to prepare our case. We want
to be prepared to go into the provocative statements of Professor
Tribe, which we will, and his writings. And we want to do our research but we do not know if he is going to be here. I know you will provide us the list of the witnesses we have
asked for for a week, and I think it only fair—and you have been
imminently fair—that we have those. There is no need to go to
Monday and only know the Monday witnesses and not know who is
going to be here Tuesday and Wednesday and Thursday and Friday
and we need that if we are going to do our work and we are really
insisting upon it. The CHAIRMAN. Yes. The answer to the question is, I believe you already have Monday's list. You will have all the lists by Saturday.
Part of the problem is juggling witnesses, not knowing when we
would end here. But you will have it in plenty of time, I assure
you. And I further assure you that when we have it—and we have
already spoken with the ranking member's staff and with the
Judge's—or what is Korologos?  Senator LEAHY. We have been wondering for years. Judge BORK. DO I have to answer that under oath, Senator?
The CHAIRMAN. NO you do not. Anyway, I spoke with Mr. Korolo­gos about it on behalf of the Judge. We will alternate. We will see
to it there is not going to be, you know, a day of people testifying
against and then no one testifying for. I have not quite worked it
all out yet but it will be worked out tomorrow. If there is an antitrust panel for, there will be an antitrust panel against. If there
are professors for, there will be professors against. I promise you it will work out that way. I just do not have the
list yet.Now, we will have one more deviation which will be helpful. You
need not answer any more questions tonight, but rather than take
his 3 minutes to close tomorrow, Senator Thurmond is going to
take those 3 minutes to close this evening and then we will begin
tomorrow as we had indicated. Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, we had all felt that the Judge would complete his
testimony today and since I have moved my family back to South
Carolina now, I had planned a commitment with them tomorrow,
and since Senator Hatch, the ranking member next to me, is here
and will be here tomorrow, I am going to ask him to take the hearing.
I feel that I should keep this commitment with my family since
there are others here that can carry on this work, and I wanted to
make a brief statement this evening before Judge Bork leaves.
Judge Bork, as you conclude your testimony tomorrow, Saturday,
before the committee, I want to make a few comments at this time.
In my 33 years in the Senate I cannot recall a nominee who has
been more open, more frank, and more effective. Judge Bork, your
intellectual power, your honesty and your courage have left an indelible imprint on this committee. Never before has a nominee to
the Supreme Court, or any other court, for that matter, subjected
himself to such an intense, probing examination. Speaking of examinations, several comments have been made
about how the committee has turned the table on you as a former
law professor so that now you had to answer questions and be examined. Well that being the case, permit me to grade you. I would
like to indicate that you have passed with honors and with honor. I
grade you A-plus. I also believe that you and those who have watched these proceedings understand what we in Congress as public officials have
long known—it is easy for an opponent or a critic to make charges
and accusations but it is often a laborious process to methodically
disprove those charges. However, your testimony has shown us again what we all know,
and that is, when enough light is cast on a situation and all the
facts are known, truth eventually triumphs. If I may borrow a
phrase we have heard before, your testimony has vacated, has
made null and void charges that you are an ideologue, that you are
anti-civil rights, that you do not support the first amendment, and
other issues discussed here. Perhaps some people do not agree with your philosophy. That is
fair and accepted in America. But philosophy should not be the
only factor in these proceedings. Your testimony across the board
has indicated that you are indeed qualified to serve with distinction on the Supreme Court. Judge, I want to compliment you as well as your wife and family,
who have been here with you throughout these proceedings. I know
as they leave the hearing room tomorrow that they will take with
them a well-founded pride in you and in your appearance before
the committee. I want to say that nothing has come put in this testimony that
shows contrary position with the American Bar Association. The
American Bar Association mainly considers three points: Integrity—there has been nothing here to denigrate your integrity; professional qualifications—there has been nothing to downgrade that;
judicial temperament—there has been nothing to downgrade that. You have met every qualification that is considered by the American Bar Association. On the matter of philosophy, people differ.
We understand that. But as I said, that should only be one factor
to be considered.
So I just want to compliment you for the way you have handled
yourself, for the way your family has stood by you here, and I hope
and pray that you will be confirmed by this committee and by the
Senate to be on the Supreme Court. You deserve it, the country deserves it, and good luck and God bless you. Judge BORK. Thank you very much. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. Judge BORK. May I say thanks to the Senator? The CHAIRMAN. Sure.
Judge BORK. Thank you very much, Senator. That means a great deal to me, particularly coming from you. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. Thank you, Judge. I hope you enjoy your dinner tonight.
Senator KENNEDY. The committee will come to order.
We will continue the hearing on the nomination of Judge Bork to be Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. The chairman of our committee, Senator Biden, will join us very soon. He had indicated that he was going to see his son in a football game. And Judge Bork indicated, I think, last evening that he was desirous that our hearing conclude by 3:00 o'clock so he might see the Boston College game on television. I think we have found something that we both agree on here.
Pursuant to our agreement, we will recognize the Senator from Alabama for questions.
Senator HEFLIN. Well, I demure to the football agenda. This hearing is causing me to miss a part of the Alabama-Florida game. I am going to cut my questioning very short. I think almost
every subject has been fully covered.
Many of us have had to miss a good deal of the questioning on this matter because of action on the floor that required us to be there—votes and other things. Some of us had to go to other com­mittee meetings and have been called out for various other things.
But every Senator has had staff representatives here, and there is a transcript being made.
This Caucus Room, which I have been in now for many, many months with the Iran-Contra hearings and these hearings, has problems sometimes with the acoustics. So I am going to read the transcript to be sure that I have not misunderstood any question that may have been asked and then any answer that may have been given.
There are only a few things I want to go into. One, yesterday I asked you about your speech. "The Crisis in Constitutional Theory:
(795)
Back to the Future," to the Philadelphia Society on April 3, 1987, which has also been labeled the "Bork wave theory of law reform." You basically said that what you were speaking to there pertained to the movement, the waves, that would sweep out to sea the debris of the nonoriginalism philosophy that had prevailed in the Court, was directed to law schools.
Well, of course, I think you can look at the speech and come up with different interpretations, and that is one.
Just as a matter of the record, I think that that speech ought to be made a part of the record, and Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent that the entire speech be included in the record for inter­pretation of those who wish to read it.
Senator KENNEDY. NO objection, so ordered.
Senator HEFLIN. NOW, I do not know whether or not Judge Gordon is going to attend, but there was a letter he wrote, and I think it ought to be a part of the record. And if you have not seen that letter that he wrote to Senator Biden, I would hope that you would be furnished a copy sometime today, so that if you want to respond to any aspect of it you have a copy.
Judge BORK. Whose letter is it, Senator?
Senator HEFLIN. That is Judge Gordon.
Judge BORK. Oh, yes.
Senator HEFLIN. Have you seen a copy of the letter that he wrote to the committee?
Judge BORK. I have not read it yet, but I suggested yesterday that I would like to make a filing with this committee on that sub­ject.
Senator HEFLIN. All right. It may well be that all of this is a mis­understanding. I happen to know Judge Gordon, and know that he is a very fine individual, and so it could be that he will testify, and then again he may not, but I do think that that letter ought to be a part of the record.
Senator KENNEDY. Without objection.
Senator HEFLIN. I have a question or two about court-stripping. As you know, section 2 of article III refers to the appellate jurisdic­tion of the United States Supreme Court and has the exceptions and regulations clause contained therein.
You have been interviewed in the Conservative Digest and may have made other statements pertaining to this. Would you set forth
your views on whether or not, first, the Congress, by an act of Congress, can in effect strip the lower Federal courts of jurisdiction
pertaining to a subject matter; and second, as to whether or not the
Supreme Court can be stripped by an act of Congress of certain jurisdiction pertaining to such matters—for example, there have
been efforts made in busing, prayer in school, and other things of
this sort—if you would. Judge BORK. Senator, I think it is conventional wisdom, and it has been so held in some cases whose names I cannot now recall,
that Congress, since it need not have created the inferior federal
courts, may deprive them of jurisdiction if it wishes—in which
case, constitutional cases and so forth would start in the State court systems.
It has been argued that the exceptions clause of article III would allow Congress to take away jurisdiction from the Supreme Court
in whole classes of cases; and as I recall, attempts have been made
to do that in the abortion area, in the school prayer area, and so forth.
I have always taken the position that the exceptions clause was not designed for that purpose, and therefore cannot be used for that purpose.
It seems to me that had the framers and the ratifiers wanted a mechanism to curb a Supreme Court that was doing things they
did not like—and return power to the Congress instead of to the courts. They would have written a clause that did that.
This clause, in fact, if you take away the jurisdiction of the Su­preme Court, everything would go to the State court systems. And
I do not think you can get the constitutional cases out of the State
court systems. I do not think you can deprive the State court systems of constitutional cases, because the Constitution says that every State judge shall be bound by this Constitution.
Well, there are two reasons, then, why the exceptions clause was not intended for use in this fashion. One is that it does not return
power to the democratic legislatures. The other is that it spreads
the decision of the issue out into 50 different court systems—then
it would have been 13 different court systems, but the principle is
the same. That means the exceptions clause could not be used in
the most important cases. For example, if a challenge to a draft law were made, and Congress took away the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to decide the
constitutionality of a draft law, you would have 50 different systems deciding that. And you cannot have a system in which the
draft is constitutional in Ohio and unconstitutional in Indiana, and
so forth across the country.
All these reasons lead me to believe that that clause was never
intended as a way of checking the Supreme Court when Congress
thinks it has created an excess. So I think it is really a housekeep86-974 0-89-28
ing clause, a clause to be used for making court jurisdiction more efficient, and making things run better—not a checking device.
Senator HEFLIN. I suppose you are familiar with the 1869 case of Ex Parte McCardle, which in effect somewhat ruled a little bit dif­ferent—it may have been circumstances, and there may be distinc­tions between it. But would you address how that case and that case looked at from stare decisis has an influence or lack of influ­ence on your opinion?
Judge BORK. Ex Parte McCardle, I think, is a somewhat ambigu­ous case, Senator. I think, if I recall correctly—I have not read it
for a long time—I think there was a suggestion in there that perhaps this was not a flat rule. But in any event that case, as you
and I know, involved a man who had been arrested, as I recall, by military authorities.
Senator HEFLIN. A Mississippi editor. He was arrested and being charged; it was a habeas corpus case. Judge BORK. Yes, during the Reconstruction Era. And he petitioned for certiorari, and as I recall—not certiorari—a petition for
habeas corpus, as you said, Senator—and I think the Supreme
Court had actually heard argument in the case when Congress removed its jurisdiction over that kind of habeas corpus. And the Court held that it was without jurisdiction.
Now, later, I think the Court has said that there were other writs of habeas corpus that could be used so that Congress had not
really effectively prevented the Court from hearing that kind of
issue; it just took that particular case away. And then following Ex
Parte McCardle, there was U.S. v. Klein, another somewhat ambiguous precedent, and they do not even cite Ex Parte McCardle in
U.S. v. Klein. But that was a case in which Congress—I guess the
Court of Claims or some court had ruled that if a Confederate
whose property had been seized received a pardon, he could get the
value of his property back—and Congress passed a statute saying
that acceptance of a pardon was proof of guilt, and therefore you
could not get your property back. And the Supreme Court said, as I
recall, two things. One was that that denied the President's power
to pardon, turned it into a condemnation rather than a pardon,
and Congress could not constitutionally do that; and also that it
prescribed a rule of decision for the courts, which Congress also
could not do in a constitutional case. Now, I do not know what the upshot of Klein and McCardle together is—and then, of course, there was Glidden v. Zdanok, a
more recent case, in which I think it was Justice Harlan who referred to something about McCardle as the law, and Justice Douglas, in either a concurrence or a dissent, said he did not think a
majority of today's Court would approve McCardle.
So I do not really know where the matter lies as a matter of
precedent or stare decisis; I think it is somewhat confused.
Senator HEFLIN. In your history, of course, as a law professor,
you had pretty well complete freedom to be provocative or to write
for any other cause that you wanted to. And of course, as Solicitor
General, your individual beliefs were somewhat restricted by the
responsibilities of that office. And as an appeals judge, of course,
some of your own personal views are restricted by certain decisions, and are narrowed to the issue that might be before you.
If you are confirmed and go on to the United States Supreme Court, while there will be some restrictions, you will be pretty well free to express your own beliefs as you see fit to do so on the issue that is before you; is that not true?
Judge BORK. Yes. I would not say I was free in the sense that I was free as a professor; not at all. But obviously, a Supreme Court is freer than a court of appeals is—although there is much latitude on the court of appeals, Senator. I do not mean to say that every­thing is mechanical.
Senator HEFLIN. One other question, just as a bit of levity. In reading about you and your past history, I understand that you would someday like to be a mystery-fiction writer, and that your detective about whom you would write would be known as "Dirk Dork"
Judge BORK. When I was back at the law firm, another fellow and I who were working—we were in our twenties then—and when we were working late at night, we used to have these fantasies about this. And occasionally, sitting around the library late at night in the law firm, we would fantasize about this fictional char­acter and the wild escapades we would put him through.
But I have not planned to write a novel about that character, Senator, for 35 years. Senator HEFLIN. Well, I think the sales might be pretty good of "Dirk Dork" by Bob Bork. 
Judge BORK. I accept your suggestion, Senator; I will do it.
Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Senator KENNEDY. The Senator from Pennsylvania, Senator Specter. Senator SPECTER, Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, yesterday, before my time ran out, you and I were
talking about the subject of judicial review and the finality of Su­preme Court decisions and the importance of having the Supreme Court as the final arbiter of constitutional issues.
You have spoken about this subject on a few occasions, and I would like to pursue the matter with what you have said on those occasions.
At a speech before the American Jewish Committee back on May 14th of 1982, you said that: "Judicial enforcement of the Constitu­tion is a powerful national tradition"—this appears on page 7. "It is thinkable that we need never have developed that tradition and that we would be as free as we are, as free as other Western na­tions whose judges never acquired the power ours have acquired."
Then you go on to say that tradition and history make weighty claims, and we should not abandon it lightly. But the thrust of what you have said there is that it would be thinkable not to have judicial review.
And in two later speeches, one at UCLA on April 24th of 1985, you said, in considering the issue of interpretivism of original intent—and the term "interpretivism" means original intent as you use it, and "noninterpretivism," judges who do not go for origi­nal intent. You say, "The choice before us therefore is clear. It is not a choice between interpretivism and noninterpretivism, but rather, between interpretivism and the abandonment of judicial review under the Constitution."
And then you made a similar statement in 1987 on June 12th, at
the American Studies Center, where you said: "But the more important point is that if originalism or interpretivism is impossible,
then there can be no legitimacy to judicial review." Now, my question is, if it is thinkable that we could proceed in
this country without judicial review, and it is impossible not to
have a doctrine where judges rely upon original intent, do you
think that we have to abandon judicial review? Judge BORK. Senator, there is simply no possibility of anybody
abandoning judicial review at this stage in our history. It is an absolutely firmly-rooted tradition in our law, and it is justified by the
way—you know, the First Congress that wrote the Judiciary Act of
1789 gave the Supreme Court jurisdiction when State courts ruled
a federal statute unconstitutional under the Federal Constitution. That pretty clearly indicates to me that the people who knew
most about the Constitution—that is the First Congress, who knew
a great deal about it—intended judicial review, because they did
not tell the Supreme Court that it had to reverse any State court
judgment holding a Federal statute unconstitutional under the
Federal Constitution, nor did they say that State courts could not
review constitutionality. So that—I want to come along to my speeches here for a
moment—so that I think judicial review was intended from the beginning, and for that reason alone, I would not abandon it. Now, the talk before the American Jewish Committee—when I
said it is thinkable we need not have started with judicial review,
all I meant by that is we have other democratic free societies like
England, France and so forth, which have a long history of freedom
without judicial review. We have it. We are not going to give it up.
Nobody is going to cut back on it. At the UCLA talk, I was meeting the charge of people who say
that, oh, discerning anything called an original understanding of
the Constitution is impossible. Well, if it is impossible to know what the Constitution means,
then I do not know where judges get their power to override democratic decisions, because I have always thought that it is the
judge's job to interpret the law and not to make it; and if you
cannot understand the Constitution—which I think is a ridiculous
claim; I think you can understand the Constitution—but if you
could not, then I do not know what would authorize a judge to
make law. That is all I was saying. Senator SPECTER. Well, but if you find that it is impossible to
find original intent, can you still have judicial review—because
your speeches, at least, are pretty categorical in saying Judge BORK. Oh, yes. Senator SPECTER. That if you do not have original
intent, you cannot have judicial review.
Now, you and I both agree—and I think this is rock bottom—
that constitutional law in this country mandates judicial review. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator SPECTER. But in the context where a presidential candidate is talking about judicial review being inappropriate, unnecessary, and in the context of an Attorney General's speech last year
which raises a suggestion, although not perfectly clear, as we dis­cussed yesterday, that the Supreme Court may not be the last
word, but the executive and the Congress has the authority to interpret the Constitution, and then you look to some of your speeches, where you say that in the absence of applying original intent,
you cannot have judicial review—I just want to be sure that you
stand firmly for judicial review whether or not you have a common understanding of original intent.
Judge BORK. Well, I stand firmly for judicial review. I have never questioned judicial review. I have always thought it was an important part of our culture and our tradition and our law. And in
America, it is an important part of our freedom. Perhaps we require judicial review more than England and France did, because
we have a much more pluralistic society and many more minorities to take care of.
But let me say one thing, Senator. What I mean by saying that if you cannot understand—if a judge sits down and he cannot understand what the Constitution is driving at, he has no idea, then I do
not know what he applies. And if his job is to interpret the law and
not to make it, I do not know what he does. But I think from my
point of view, I was just meeting those who say you cannot understand the Constitution. I think that is dead wrong. I think you can understand the Constitution.
Senator SPECTER. Well, but suppose you came to a point where you said that determining original intent is impossible. Would it
follow, then, that you could not have judicial review in this coun­try?
Judge BORK. I think you would require a consensus of the people that they wanted judges to rule, even though the judges had no law.
Senator SPECTER. There is pretty much that consensus by the tra­dition of our Court, isn't there? Judge BORK. I do not think so, Senator. I think the American
people want judges to interpret the law and not to make it. I think that is pretty clear.
Senator SPECTER. Well, I agree with you about that. But the in­terpretation of the law does not depend upon an understanding of original intent.
Judge BORK. Well, when I say original intent—I understand, you are making a good point, Senator—but when I say original intent,
what I mean is really original understanding, because law is a
public act, and it is really what was understood generally at the
time the Constitution was framed, not the subjective intentions of James Madison.
And when I say original understanding, when I sit down and look at the Bill of Rights, and it says "freedom of the press," right
away, I know what they are driving at. I may not know exactly
what they mean, but I know what they are driving at. I know the
central freedom, or the core of the freedom, that they are driving
at. When they say "no unreasonable searches or seizures," not only
from the language but from the history of the British and the way
they behaved in this country with their searches and seizures and
general warrants, I know what they are driving at.
So I do not think there is any difficulty in understanding the
basic principles of the powers granted to Congress or of the free­doms preserved in the Bill of Rights and the Civil War Amend­ments.
Senator SPECTER. Well, Judge Bork, this theme has run through the hearing and I think is a central theme, and I think there is some difference of opinion as to whether you can really find origi­nal intent, whether the tradition of U.S. constitutional interpreta­tion looks to specific constitutional rights as, for example, privacy, which we have talked about so often, or whether in a more general­ized context, Justices who advocate restraint, like Frankfurter, talk about values rooted in the conscience and tradition of the people, and that the history of U.S. constitutional jurisprudence, as I see it, has in many, many cases not been grounded on original intent— sometimes, yes, but frequently not.
And it would be my thought that as the Court goes forward, and that if you are confirmed, that there would be more flexibility in
the application of constitutional law. And I look to your own writ­ings on the question of whether you can really find original intent.
In 1968, in the article that you have referred to a number of times in Fortune Magazine, where you set forth a theory of constitutional law, you had written this at page 141: "The text of the
Constitution, as anyone experienced with words might expect, is
least precise where it is the most important. Like the Ten Commandments, the Constitution enshrines profound values, but neces­sarily omits the minor premises required to apply them."
So that, from that statement, it seems to me a fair reading is that it is pretty hard to find intent of the framers. Then, you go on on the same page: "History can be of considerable help, but it tells much too little about the specific intentions of
the men who framed, adopted and ratified the great clauses. The
record is incomplete. The men involved often had vague or even conflicting intentions."
In the often-quoted Indiana Law Review article, you talk at page 22 about the first amendment, and you say: "The framers seemed
to have no coherent theory of free speech." Then, you say: "The
first amendment, like the rest of the Bill of Rights, appears to have
been a hastily-drafted document upon which little thought was ex­tended."
Then, at page 26, you say: "The framers of the first amendment probably had no clear view of that proposition." And in your later speeches, you discuss repetitively the question
about it is really the ratifiers as opposed to the framers and the conflicting views.
Now, in that context, where I think you are exactly right in what you have written and said, because of the great difficulty of
finding intent, how much validity is there in searching for original
intent as a necessary prerequisite for a constitutional decision, without which the Court has no legitimacy?
Judge BORK. Well, I think that is right, Senator; there is a lot of difficulty. But let me discuss this. Unlike the Ten Commandments,
the Constitution and the Bill of Rights and the Commandments
have a similar—the Bill of Rights and the Ten Commandments
have a similar generality, but we are closer in history, and we have
a lot of evidence about the Bill of Rights now.
The remark I made in Indiana, which you have just quoted, I
took from Leonard Levy's book on the first amendment. That book
is now about 30 years old; I think he has found further evidence, and other people have found further evidence since then.
But we do have, in the case of the Constitution—I referred to the fact that we cannot know the framers' specific intentions; I think
you read that in one of those pieces, that we cannot know their
specific intentions, and indeed we cannot. And indeed, their specific intentions would not help us a great deal because our task is to
apply their public understanding of what they were protecting to
modern circumstances as to which they could have no specific in­tentions.
But when I talk about the original understanding, what a judge needs from the Constitution is a major premise—what is it he is supposed to protect—and then he has to protect it.
Now, we have the text. For example, the first amendment tells us that it deals with religion, no establishment, free exercise. Right
away we know that we are in an area, so that we know it is not
just a free-floating liberty; we know what they are talking about.
They are talking about not establishing religion, and they are talk­ing about free exercise of religion.
Then they say Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech or of the press. So I know now that I am talking about
speech and press, and the freedom of those two, so I know that I
am not talking about a generalized liberty; I am talking about a freedom of the press.
Now, when you want to flesh that out, for example, you have a lot of contemporary debate about what was going on. You have, in
the case of the main body of the Constitution, the Federalist
Papers, the Anti-Federalist Papers, and many debates. In the case
of the Bill of Rights, we are a little short on debates in Congress,
but you have some contemporary discussion; you have actions by
the early Congresses which shows what they understood themselves to have proposed; and you have actions by the early courts,
which show what they understood to have been done, and some of
those courts for people who were at the convention or at various ratifying conventions.
And then you have, for example, in the case of the free speech clause, or the free press clause, episodes of early history, such as
the passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts and the terrible controversy that raged around those, so that we now understand that the
Alien and Sedition Acts were in fact unconstitutional statutes,
which, in all this way, we begin to get a principle whose contours
are not clearcut. That is granted. But at least we understand the basic freedom they wanted to preserve.
Now, judges who look for original understanding and look at the same evidence and think as hard as they can will, in the borderline
cases, often come out differently. I do not mean to say that original
understanding gives anybody a mechanical way to approach a problem. It does not; but it gives them a pretty firm starting point.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, as you define it, it does not seem
to me that original intent provides any more specificity than the
Frankfurter definition or the Cardozo definition of rooted in the
tradition and history of our society.
When you talk about fundamental values—and you have written
on surveillance and electronic surveillance, which the Founding
Fathers could not have anticipated; similarly, they could not have
anticipated birth control devices. You talk about the concept of privacy, it runs through the Constitution, in a number of amendments
as you described them yesterday. Why is the doctrine of original
intent sacrosanct in terms of the great difficulty of applying it with
specificity, as you say—because you point out that their specific intent is not clearcut.
Does that definition really advance the definition of constitution­al values more so than Cardozo and the nature of the judicial process?
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, you are making a very powerful ar­gument from a very strong tradition. I hope—I think what I am saying also comes from a very strong tradition in our constitutional law, going back to Joseph Story and the first Marshall Court.
Let me say this. If the concept of ordered liberty, which Cardozo and others used, turned out to be a continuing tradition on the Supreme Court—and I do not know where it stands now—and if it
had a defined category so that judges were not free to make law at will, then I would not have so much difficulty with it.
But as you know, Justice Black, who objected strongly to what he called the natural law/due process version of making law, in fact
incorporated, tried to get and succeeded, various parts of the Bill of
Rights, now almost all of the Bill of Rights, incorporated against
the States through the 14th amendment, and in large part his
motive for doing that, as he said, was to prevent judges from roaming at will. He thought if you could incorporate the Bill of Rights
against the States, then judges would apply the prohibition to the
Bill of Rights and secure liberty, but they would not use this what he called natural law method of making up rights.
And on that point, Senator, reasonable men can differ. Strong ar­guments can be made on both sides. I adhere to my view that I
want judges to be confined by the law, not make it up. There are
others who disagree with that, but as I said, I believe in interpret­ing it, not creating it.
Senator SPECTER. Well, Judge Bork, it is true that the specific provisions of the Bill of Rights were taken into the due process
clause of the 14th amendment. But that was not the sole basis used
by the Court. And before the Court came to the incorporation doctrine, there were many wrangles. And the first time the Supreme
Court interfered, or took jurisdiction of and changed, a State criminal proceeding was the very famous case of Brown v. Mississippi.
And if you read through that case, a 1936 opinion of the Supreme
Court of the United States, it is an abject horror story—and I am
not going to go through the facts. Sufficient to quote Chief Justices
Hughes' characterization of it as a medieval account as to what
was done to the black defendant in that case by the law enforce­ment authorities of Mississippi.
And the Court then, for the first time, strikes down a State criminal conviction on the ground that it offends principles of justice rooted in the tradition and conscience of our people, so as to be
ranked as fundamental. And that got it started.
And then Justice Black comes along in the case of Ashcraft v.
Tennessee, which involves really grilling. And as I was rethinking
Ashcraft v. Tennessee, I thought you might have standing, Judge
Bork, to object to what has been going on here. Ashcraft was questioned for 36 hours by half a dozen law enforcement officials. You have been questioned for longer than that, by more.
But Ashcraft is a Black opinion, and it is pretty hard sometimes to separate procedural due process from substantive due process.
And Black strikes down the conviction on grounds of an involun­tary confession.
But perhaps it is sufficient, Judge Bork, if you say that the argu­ment is a powerful argument from strong tradition, because part of
our process here, in our checks and balance system—this is the
only time that anyone gets to talk to a potential Supreme Court
nominee or to a federal judge, and it is a great thing in our system,
and it is the strength and rockbed, life tenure. And I think of all
the traditions in our country, that is the strongest; that has been
the backbone freedom in this country for 200 years.
So that if you are confirmed, we will never have a chance to talk to you againJudge BORK. Well, you can talk to me, Senator; it may be not under these lights.
Senator SPECTER. Well, it will not be under these lights, and it will not be quite this way. And this is, I think, part of the beauty of the system of checks and balances.
I had the occasion on Thursday, day before yesterday, to join the President in going to Philadelphia and then to come back here in
the afternoon and participate in this proceeding, and the President
had some very good things to say about you, Judge Bork. And it is
the beauty of the system where the Court has the last word, and
the President makes the appointments, and you have to clear the
Senate. So this is an experience which is a very unique one.
You and I were talking a few moments ago, and I think that this will set a pattern for the future, and a very good one, for the benefit of the country, because this is a very different confirmation proceeding than we had last year with Justice Rehnquist for Chief and
for Judge Scalia for Justice and for Justice O'Connor in 1981.
Many people do not realize that these proceedings where nominees
appear before Senators are of relatively recent duration, starting
with Justice Frankfurter.
But we have gone farther in this line, I think, than at any time
in the past. And it may be that there will be some imprint on your
thinking if you are confirmed about what may be a strong argument—a powerful argument, as you put—from a strong tradition.
That is part of what the process is and what I would hope would be
accomplished.
And when I look at the question of original intent, I think it is
fine in some cases where you can find it, and I think if you can
find it, you ought to apply it. But I think so much of the time you
cannot find it, and that you ought not be hidebound by it, and that
Frankfurter is right when he talks about the contours of the law
being reasonably specific and not really subjective, and you do not
have to have an articulation of privacy to find it as a fundamental
right in the Constitution to apply it, if the facts of the case require it in accordance with the needs of the Nation, which is your language from a few days ago as you talked about the commerce
clause. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator SPECTER. If you look beyond the issue of original intent
to the issue of legislative intent, there is a very interesting comment by Justice Scalia in the case of Edwards y. Aguilar, where he
says at page 27 of the opinion—and he is talking about legislative
intent—"Discerning the subjective motivation of those enacting the
statute is, to be honest, almost always an impossible task." Going
on to page 28, he says, "To look for the sole purpose of even a
single legislator is probably to look for something that does not
exist." And legislative intent in the statutes is very much akin to original intent of the drafters or of the ratifiers, and I am sure that
every one of my colleagues here today would agree that if you seek
legislative intent, it is nebulous and really nonexistent as you try
to carve it out for an entire body of 100 Senators or 435 Congressmen. So the question arises to what extent can you really bottom your
opinions on what the Congress intended. Judge BORK. Well, in the statute, Senator, I have always had to—
and I did not think I did too badly at getting at what Congress is
driving at Senator SPECTER. HOW do you know? Judge BORK. Well, sometimes Congress will tell you if they do
not think you got it right.Senator SPECTER. We say very little on those subjects. Our reply
power, our timing, is almost nonexistent. You might get a call—
well, we would not call you up, either Judge BORK. I meant you might amend the statute so that we got
it right.Senator SPECTER. Well, you can ask Senator Byrd about how difficult it is to pass anything through the Congress in terms of responding when something occurs. We are very good at inaction.
You cannot tell anything by what we do not do. Judge BORK. All right. I think Justice Scalia—and he is a friend
of mine, so he will not take this amiss—I think he was taking an
easy target when he talked about subjective intent.
I do not think—that is right—I cannot tell what the subjective
intent of various people is, but I can tell from what they wrote and
what they said what the general understanding was. And in the
case of the Constitution, we have a lot of historical records which
are constantly being improved—I mean, the research into them is
constantly being improved—to show what the public understanding
of the Constitution was.
Senator HATCH. Would the Senator yield for a comment on that? Senator SPECTER. NO, Senator Hatch. I would prefer to finish my questioning. I have limited time, and there will be time later, and I
am right in the middle of a train of thought here.
Judge Bork, moving to the issue of legislative intent in the antitrust field, a subject which I had broached with you yesterday, in
your book on antitrust, turning to page 412, you say this: "Congress as a whole is institutionally incapable of the sustained, rigor­ous and consistent thought that the fashioning of a rational antitrust policy requires."Now, if that is so, Judge Bork—and you may be entirely right-
where does that leave the courts on enforcing Congressional
intent? Judge BORK. Let me just read the next sentence, so I get off the
hook here a little bit. Senator SPECTER. Sure. Judge BORK. NO group of that size, the size of Congress, could accomplish the task. I mean, large bodies simply do not reason coherently together. There are just too many people to sit down and
draft a detailed antitrust law according to the teachings of microeconomics. Where it leaves me, Senator, is this. The antitrust laws are remarkable statutes, and as the Supreme Court has said, they have
the generality of provisions of the Constitution. The Sherman Act,
according to John Sherman, the Senator whose Act it really was
and who did most of the explanation of it, he gave examples of
things that were to be illegal, and he said for the rest, it was left to
the courts to evolve—to protect competition from case to case, as
they saw it, as they understood the facts and the competition. The later antitrust statutes, the Clayton Act in particular, directs the courts to deal with certain kinds of events—mergers and
so forth—which may tend toward monopoly or tend toward a lessening of competition. That is really a delegation to courts to use
their best understanding of what preserves competition and what
harms competition. And that is the kind of principle that Congress
is perfectly capable of thinking of and enacting, and leaving it to
the courts to protect competition. Senator SPECTER. But Judge Bork, in your writings, you complain about searching for congressional intent, and you refer to one Congressman who wants to have small businesses and not conglomerates or concentration, in order to avoid slum housing in big cities.
And with all due respect, you ridicule that sort of a legislative objective, and you say that, given the vagaries of what Congress has
intended or what some Congressmen have spoken about in the
antitrust field, it is too vague for judicial enforcement. Judge BORK. Senator, I think I did say that, but I think I was
making a somewhat different point. There are—and this goes back
to the main theme of my view of judging—there are commentators
in the field of antitrust who want courts, through the antitrust
laws, to impose or implement multiple values, often having nothing
to do with competition. And I was making the point—and then
they point to somebody who said in the legislative history of the
Clayton Act, Section 7, who talked about the fact that where you
have big business, you have more smog and a higher lung cancer
rate, or something of that sort—and I was ridiculing the idea that
a judge should take that and start measuring smog and lung
cancer rates to decide whether or not a merger was legal, because
the statute—a judge cannot—that is just a complete delegation to
the judge to make any social policy. What a judge can do is look at
the words of the statute, which say competition and monopoly; promote one, avoid the other.
Senator SPECTER. But Judge Bork, if the Congress is giving you
multiple values, and then you say that they have nothing to do
with competition, you are the judge; you are supposed to carry out,
under your theory, the legislature's intent. This is Madisonian majoritarianism. Who are you to say that these multiple values are
not worthwhile? Judge BORK. Oh, I did not say that, Senator. I Senator SPECTER. Well, but you are saying they have nothing to
do with competition.Judge BORK. Well, if you look at the legislative history, Senator,
as I have for my sins in these statutes, no Congressman ever says
preserve competition, but if there is a conflict between that and
smog, or a conflict between that and something else, make a trade-
off between them; let a little injury to competition occur in order to
reduce smog. No Congressman ever says a thing like that. What they do is say, "We are passing a statute to improve competition," and then everybody gets up and makes a talk about all
the other good things it will do. But those are side effects, I think,
of the statute to preserve competition, not independent values that
a judge is supposed to weigh. Senator SPECTER. Well, Judge Bork, the thrust that I read from
your writing in the antitrust field is a conclusion of not a very—
"high regard" would be the wrong word, for the congressional
intent—but not a kind of dedication to carrying out congressional
intent which you have written about in other fields. Let me refer you to the section on price discrimination, page 382.
You start off here: "The genesis of the Robinson-Patman Act is an
oft-told tale. Enacted in 1936, the statute was a child of the Depression, as was so much pernicious economic regulation. Robinson-
Patman shared with much of that regulation, notably the National
Industrial Recovery Act, the premise that free markets were rife
with unfair and anticompetitive practice which threatened competition, small businesses and consumers." And then you go on, on the next page, in the first full paragraph:
"Antitrust concerned with vertical mergers is mistaken.' Judge BORK. I am sorry, Senator. Where is that? Senator SPECTER. This goes back to page 220. It is my next page;
it is not your next page. Judge BORK. Okay. Senator SPECTER. "Antitrust concerned with vertical mergers is
mistaken. Vertical mergers are means of creating efficiency, not of
injuring competition."
Let me put these two questions in one, because I am going to run
out of time here, notwithstanding how much time it appears to be.
Let me start with the first question. When you call an act "pernicious," does that mean it is unconstitutional, by the way?
Judge BORK. NO, not at all. There are a lot of Senator SPECTER. HOW do you enforce a pernicious act, Judge
Bork?
Judge BORK. YOU have to enforce it. You may not like it, but you
have got to enforce it.
Senator SPECTER. Well, how do you do it on the curved lines?
How do you do it on the complex factual issues which are presented to you where, as the finder of fact, you have the discretion to find the facts, and you could arguably find them in a variety of
ways so that an appellate court would not reverse you. Does it color your thinking to find set of facts A, so that you do
not have to apply this pernicious law?
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I do not know. I have never been a
trial judge, and I hope not. If I were a trial judge, I would try to
find the facts as best I could from the contentions of the parties. I think, by the way, Senator, it should be said that the scholarly
opinion on all sides of the antitrust issue is that the Robinson-
Patman Act is a peculiarly pernicious statute. Senator SPECTER. I do not care, Judge Bork. The Congress passed
it Judge BORK. Oh, I agree with that. Senator SPECTER. And you say—well, I do care, of
course—but for purposes of carrying out your approach to the law,
legislative acts govern, Madisonian majoritarianism; that is what is
to be enforced, unless there is a specific constitutional provision to
strike it down. Absent that, no legitimacy in the Court. Judge BORK. Right. Senator SPECTER. YOU have got a pernicious statute. What do you
do with it? Judge BORK. I apply it Senator SPECTER. On the subject of vertical mergers, "are means
of creating efficiency, not of injuring competition." "Congress prohibits vertical mergers," you say a fair reading of
the statute says. What do you do? Judge BORK. I strike down the vertical merger if a fair reading of
the statute says that. I am not out there as a judge to make the economy wonderful. I
am out there to follow Congress' intentions. And when Congress
has delegated to a judge, to the courts, the task of deciding when
competition is threatened and when it is not, you do the best you
can. On the other hand, if Congress says "This thing threatens competition; strike it down," I have to do that, even if I do not think it
threatens competition. Senator SPECTER. And how do you do that when Congress as a
whole is institutionally incapable of a sustained, rigorous and consistently thought out fashioning of a rational antitrust policy? Judge BORK. Well, I was talking about whether Congress could
write a detailed set of antitrust regulations which made economic
sense, and that would require a debate of economists for about a
year, and I do not think the Congress has the time and has too
many people to have that kind of a debate. But Congress is certainly capable of adopting the general principle of preserving competition and giving some illustrations of what they mean. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, the New York Times, on March
8th of 1983, wrote this about you: "Last week, at a day-long workshop sponsored by the Conference Board, a business research organization, Judge Bork, who sits on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia, made it plain that he felt free to apply his
economic theories, whatever the law says. Take his view on the
Robinson-Patman Act, which prohibits price discrimination." And
there is a quote here, presumably your statement. " 'If the new eco­nomics is right, there is never a case in which price discrimination
injures competition,' Judge Bork said. In the Robinson-Patman
Act, when Congress said it wanted to forbid price discrimination to
protect competition, they said it with a wink. I do not think it is a
judge's job to enforce winks.' " I think the first question must be: Did you say that? Judge BORK. NO. I think I wrote a letter to them, because I was— I think I did—I was quite furious about that statement that I felt free to ignore that law and enforce my economics. And when I saw
that, I was quite angry. Senator SPECTER. Did they publish your letter? Judge BORK. I do not know. Does anybody know if I have a letter? We do not know. Senator SPECTER. Are you sure you wrote a letter? Judge BORK. I either did that or called somebody, because I
was Senator SPECTER. Whom did you call? Judge BORK. I do not know. It might have been Betty Bach, who
ran the conference, or it might have been the reporter. But in any event, I have never Senator SPECTER. But you are not sure? Judge BORK. Well, I will have to check it. But the fact is Senator SPECTER. I would like to know if you made a contemporaneous denial of that. Judge BORK. All right. Well, I may even be able to find a transcript of the speech, because that is the reporter's interpretation of
what I said. Well, I do have here a transcript of the speech—I guess—except I
do not think this is Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I did not see that speech among
those you provided to the committee. Judge BORK. Well, I did not see it before myself, either. Maybe
somebody found it with a nexis search or something. We will provide it to you. I do not want to go through it now. It would take the rest of your
time if I did. But I have never taken the position that I am free to
apply my economics no matter what the law says. The reference to the "wink"—oh, here is a letter. Senator SPECTER. Good. Judge BORK. "TO the Editor: The reporting of my remarks at the
Conference Board seriously misrepresents my views of my obligation as a Judge. I most definitely did not make it 'plain that I felt
free to apply my economic theories whatever the antitrust law
says.' I stated emphatically that as a lower court judge, I have an
absolute duty to follow the law as laid down by the Supreme Court.
At most, a lower court judge can give us reasons for doubting the
usefulness of a rule. That practice is both common and beneficial * * *," and so forth.
And I do not want to read the whole letter, because it goes on for
a while, but I will provide you that, too.
But the reference to the "wink" is one I have made before, and
the reason I said that—and I think I said it in the book—I was
once discussing what struck me as a peculiarly outrageous Robin-
son-Patman Act decision by the Supreme Court in which they in
effect made competition impossible in a local market—and a decision that everybody has criticized. And I was discussing it with a
young man who had just left a clerkship on the Supreme Court,
and he said, oh, the Justice thinks sure, the Act says competition,
but Congress passed it with a wink; they did not mean competition,
they meant protect competitors—protect people from competition. Well, I thought that was a terrible judicial role. I think you do
not enforce a congressional "wink" because Congress should pass
its statutes so the people know what is being passed Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, what is a "congressional wink"? Judge BORK. This Justice apparently thought that Congress said
competition, but he had some reason to believe when they said it,
they did not mean it. Senator SPECTER. YOU are saying some Supreme Court Justice
said he thought that Congress passed something with a wink? Judge BORK. That is what I heard. Senator SPECTER. DO you think Congress passes laws with a
wink? Judge BORK. NO, no, I do not think so. And I think furthermore
that if a Justice thinks that, he ought not to accept the wink; he
ought to read the statute and apply the statute that they passed.
That is what I was saying in this thing. I said it in the book. Senator SPECTER. SO you were misquoted on the article which appeared in the Times? Judge BORK. I never—Senator Specter, not only is that inconsistent with my entire philosophy, but I would never be unintelligent
enough to run around, saying I am free, I do not have to apply the
law. I think there are people out there who are worried about what
they call the "Chicago school of economics," and there are people
in the "Chicago school of economics"—it is not a Chicago school; it
is just basic price theory—there are people who think that economics governs everything, or almost everything. I am not one of them,
and I Senator SPECTER. Were you ever? Judge BORK. NO. I used Senator SPECTER. Close? Judge BORK. NO. I used to think that economics governed marketplaces, but I used to think that by analogy, you could take sort
of a libertarian position with respect to social processes, too, and
governmental processes. The analogy, I have given up. I do not
think it makes any sense. Senator SPECTER. Well, I have seen some of your writings on
that, and perhaps we will have time to get to it. It is a fascinating
field.
Judge Bork, I do not disagree with your interpretation of antitrust law, and I do not intend to pursue it any further. The limited
point that I seek to make here on the references to the antitrust
laws is the difficulty of finding congressional intent and the wide
range of judicial discretion which necessarily applies, and the practical effect of a judge's role is to apply that discretion and not to be
able to really find what legislators' intend, and to try and make
some sense out of what a judge may conclude to be a pernicious
law, and to try to make some sense out of conflicting legislators'
statements in the Congressional Record; and that a judge's role
goes much beyond interstitial legislation, as the term is used, to
really try to pull the whole picture together; and that that is the
tradition of the law, and I think appropriately so. And I think your
antitrust writings make a lot of sense, and I think that that is
what judges have to do. But I do think that as you apply that beyond the antitrust field,
into other legislative lines and into constitutional lines, there is a
broader traditional role of the judge in applying values to the
needs of the nation against, again, your word, beyond what you can
find in some specific intent. So let me move on to the subject of federalism, which you have
written about extensively and spoken about. This involves the question of federalism as it relates to a more central topic which has
been a very important one in these hearings, and that is your
statement that the time has passed for upsetting certain constitutional doctrines, which are too deeply embedded in the fabric of the
Nation to change those doctrines. I think that is a very important point, Judge Bork, because it relates to your own interpretation of original intent, and on some
lines, where you think that even though original intent was followed, as you gave the example of the commerce clause, it is too
late, and it is part of your judicial philosophy which you articulate
on stare decisis, which may apply to other cases, and you enumerated a string of values and criteria which would not upset established cases, trying to give some regard for expectation, stability in
the law, and so forth, as you have testified to. A statement that you made in a speech in 1986, last year, raises
some question about that, and I just want to ask you that. This is a
speech on federalism which was delivered at the Attorney General's Conference in Williamsburg January 14th to 26th, 1986, and I
am referring now to page 10. You say this: "The protection of federalism from national legislative powers is more difficult. There
are so many laws on the books, so many Supreme Court decisions
upholding them, and the federal government is involved in so
many areas, that a new, sharp-edged definition of national powers,
such as commerce, taxing and spending, would create chaos politically, economically and socially." And I will leave some out here—
it does not apply to the meaning. Then you go on to say: "Dees it mean that we must give up judicial protection of federalism? It was this thought that for a time
led me to think that we had passed the point of no return. I am no
longer so sure, though. I am no longer so sure. So what I am about
to say is to be understood as tentative and indeed, speculative."
Then I omit some material, again not germane.
Then you say: "If federalism is to receive judicial protection, I
think courts will have to admit that bright line tests are unavailable; that prior cases are irreconcilable, and that decisions will
turn on such matters as the degree of federal intrusiveness and the
vitality of States as policymakers." Then I leave some out.
"Would this be unacceptable judicial activism? Perhaps not.
There is nothing wrong with judges being active in the defense of
real constitutional principles." Close quotes.
Now, my question is this. If you go to rockbed, as you articulate
it, in the commerce power—and you have written about this repetitively—and if you are not so sure last year that you may not be
able to revitalize judicial activism which, as you say, is appropriate,
and I agree with you, in defense of the Constitution and articulation of constitutional principles, my questions are, first, do you believe that it is now not too late to revive the questions on the commerce clause and federalism? And, if it is not too late there, perhaps it is not too late anywhere, in any of the cases, to go back,
take another look, and change the Court interpretations of the
Constitution. Judge BORK. That is a good question, Senator, but none of this suggests rolling back any commerce clause decisions. And the sentence, right after you say, "The decisions will turn on such matters
as the degree of federal intrusiveness and the vitality of States as
policymakers, perhaps a presumption can be established against
federal invasions of areas traditionally reserved to the States,"
what I was thinking about is, you know, we have not yet said that
the commerce clause could be used to enact a national law of divorce, or to enact—maybe it can—but there are certain local,
moral matters—divorce, marriage and so forth—that it has been
traditionally thought simply was not the business of the federal
government. Now, that would be a considerable extension of anywhere that
Congress has gone yet with the commerce clause. And as I said,
this was tentative, but it may be that there are some local matters
so traditionally reserved to the States that the commerce clause
should not go there. But I had no intention of rolling anything back that has been
done. Senator SPECTER. Well, Judge Bork, the thing that concerns me about your statement there, and the reason I raise the question, is
that you had written extensively and spoken extensively prior to
that 1986 speech about you cannot unscramble the eggs on the
commerce clause; it is just too late. Judge BORK. YOU cannot. Senator SPECTER. But here, you come up in 1986, and you say you
are not so sure. And I just want to be sure that you are sure. Judge BORK. I am sure, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Okay. Judge BORK. But I am sure of this. I would not for a moment go
back and reverse the cases that give Congress the power that it has
exercised. There may be some things, like marriage law or divorce
law or something of that sort. Justice Holmes said in his dissent in
Northern Securities that of course the Congress could not make
laws about marriage and divorce under the commerce power. I do
not know if they can now or not. But I was speculating that there
might be a presumption against reaching into that area. I have no
idea. But I am not going to undo anything that has been done. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I now want to move to the ques­tion of the executive/legislative conflict. This is a subject that Senator Byrd questioned you about extensively yesterday, and I had intended to ask you about Barnes v. Kline and the consideration that we ought to renounce outright the whole notion of congressional
standing, but that has been done in some detail, so I will move on.
But at the outset, I want to raise a question that troubles me as
to the appropriate degree of deference which the Senate should
give to a Presidential nominee. And this is a matter, like judicial
philosophy, which is widely debated. And as I said in my opening
statement, you had made the comment to me when we sat down
early on that you thought judicial philosophy was appropriate for
discussion, and you have certainly proved it in the course of the
past five days. There has been a general thought that there is a certain deference owed to the President under our advise and consent function,
and of course, each Senator has to decide for himself as to what
that means. And a little different consideration has crossed my
mind on the advise and consent function as it relates to legislative/
executive conflicts, because here we are—the President nominates,
the Senate confirms, and if the Court, and if the judicial nominee
has a position which is likely to upset the balance between article I
powers, the Congress—we still are article I—and article II powers,
the executive, then perhaps that kind of deference, if any exists, is
not owed. And that is a theoretical issue which I have not found
any writing on. I would invite any observation you would care to make, but I
would understand if you would not care to make an observation,
because it may really be a question solely for the Senate. But if you
care to make an observation, I would be pleased to hear it. Judge BORK. Well, I do not know that I have any, or could properly give any advice to the Senate or to a Senator on that subject.
However, I think my case is not one in which there is any unusual
view of the relationships between the President and the Congress. Senator SPECTER. SO we do not have to deal with the law on the
subject, because the facts do not fit the doctrine? Judge BORK. I think that is right, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Okay. Let us go to the facts, then. Judge BORK. All right. Senator SPECTER. The first question is the War Powers Act.
Judge BORK. I am sighing, because I cannot find that paper. Senator SPECTER. YOU can have my copy. It is very short. All of
these deep issues are expressed in very brief terms.
In the Wall Street Journal, March 9, 1978: "As expiation for
Vietnam, we have the War Powers resolution, an attempt by Congress to share in detail decisions about the deployment of U.S.
armed forces in the world. It is probably unconstitutional, and certainly unworkable."
Now, this is an issue which we do not care very much about. It
has not been on the Senate floor since yesterday afternoon, and we
took up the question as to whether the War Powers Act was applicable to the Persian Gulf situation. I voted that it was, and I feel
very strongly about the limits of executive authority and of balance.
In 1984, there was an effort made to frame a test for constitutionality of the War Powers Act. Senator Baker participated in it; I
went to the trouble of drafting a complaint—I had not done that for a while. And we talked to the Department of Justice about
framing a case. And the standing issue, we think we can get by by
legislation; the case in controversy, we are not so sure about. You
fellows, the Court, you fellows, if confirmed, have the final word on
that. But there is a real hot argument about the War Powers Act, as
to whether it is constitutional or not. It says if U.S. personnel are
in imminent hostilities, danger of hostilities, then the President
has to report to Congress, and there are a whole series of procedures to be followed because the Congress has the authority to declare war, and it has been taken over by the executive branch. In 1984, we had extensive debates on the subject, and I asked
Senator Percy, who was managing the administration's bill, about
whether Korea was a war, and he said yes, it was; and was Vietnam a war, yes, it was. And Congress did not declare war, and the
Congress came back with the War Powers Act, and the President
has made submissions choosing a form of language not to recognize
constitutionality. Now, as to the issue of standing, isn't the Congress entitled to
have the Court make a decision where the President ignores the
Act? We may be right, and we may be wrong. But take the standing question first. Why shouldn't we have a right to have the Article III Branch, the Supreme Court, decide the case? Judge BORK. I would like to—I do not think I had better discuss
that particular case, because that is in the courts, I think. I think
it is in my court right now, the D.C. Circuit—isn't it? Senator SPECTER. NO. It is in the district court. It will never get to the circuit court in time to be anything but moot. Judge BORK. Oh, all right. But even so, I think I should not dis­cuss standing in a particular case that is in fact a live case. Senator SPECTER. Well, I think that is fair, Judge Bork, and I will not press the issue. I bring it up because you have written so extensively on it. You are a very different kind of a nominee, because on all of
these questions you have stated an opinion. Senator Simpson
agrees. And I ask you these questions only because you have written, and you have made sweeping declarations about renouncing
congressional standing.Judge BORK. Well, yes Senator SPECTER. Let me ask the question in a different way, to
give you a chance to respond. Here, you have the War Powers Act. On the procedure, from
what I read about you, I do not think you will give us standing.
Maybe I have a conflict of interest here, as a litigant. I have not
gotten involved in any of the cases, but as a potential litigant. But
then there is the doctrine of necessity, so we have to either confirm
you or not. But we have reason to believe that you are against us on the
merits Judge BORK. On the War Powers Act? Senator SPECTER. War Powers Act, yes; you say it is probably unconstitutional. Judge BORK. Well Senator SPECTER. Let me finish the question. Then we have
reason to think you are against us on the procedure. Now, given
the concern of the U.S. Senate for having this law interpreted,
number one, and then interpreted as the Senate sees it, why should
we confirm a nominee who is likely to find against us on both
those important grounds? Judge BORK. Well, I do not want to tell you why you should confirm me, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Well, I cannot ask you the question as to
whether it is unconstitutional that we have standing Judge BORK. Let me discuss what I meant back then, when I
wrote that one sentence leading into a different subject. The War Powers Act at the time, I thought, had a problem because it has a legislative veto in it—as I recall it—I have not
looked at the War Powers Act for Senator SPECTER. It does. Judge BORK. Yes—and I did not really have any
trouble when I looked at it, a long time ago, with the reporting or
the consulting aspects of the Act. I thought that on the part about
controlling the introduction of troops, or withdrawal of troops, and
so forth, that that could be constitutional in some cases and possibly unconstitutional in others. Let me describe what I mean. The ultimate power in this society about war and peace is Congress. It can declare war—it can not only declare war, it can refuse
spending, appropriations authority. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, realistically, what has happened
on that? We really, in the Congress, do not have the power to declare war
anymore, given the realities of international events today. When
the President acts in Lebanon, in Grenada, in the Persian Gulf, the
reality is that the day of Congress declaring war is gone. On the spending issue, the reality there again is that Congress
lacks the power, because once the President has dispatched a fleet
to the Persian Gulf, it is unthinkable and impossible for the Congress not to fund that operation. If we do not have authority under the War Powers Act to require
a certain Presidential response and then to say no to the President,
where does the Congress in 1987 exercise its congressional authority to declare war? Judge BORK. Well, maybe you can do it under aspects of the War
Powers Act. I was really—I see your point, Senator, and it is a good
point. I do not mean to dispute it. I had thought it would be a little
easier to tell the President, "You have two weeks to, if you want
to, get those ships out of there," and after that, no more money
may be spent.Senator SPECTER. Who is going to tell him? Judge BORK. Well, I assume the Congress would.
But anyway, let me go on to the War Powers Act, because I was
leading into a somewhat different point. I was merely saying that
the ultimate question should be for Congress, about hostilities and
war and so forth, but there are tactical decisions to be made.
To take an example which I have given before, I think Congress
could have told the President to shut down World War II, clearly.
But I think if Congress had told him he had to surrender the air­borne troops at Bastonne, I think that is a decision for the President, not for the Congress. That is a tactical decision, and he is the Commander-in-Chief.
Now, my only thing about the War Powers Act—aside from the legislative veto aspect, which I do not know about anymore—it
may be that if it leads to micro-management of tactical decisions in
a conflict by Congress, then I think there is a constitutional prob­lem.
Now, maybe it can be interpreted so that that problem never arises. I do not know. But that is all I meant in this brief one sen­tence as I was leading into something else.
Senator SPECTER. But Judge Bork, the concern that I have arises on the balance of your writing on executive/legislative relationships. And I would turn to the writing you made in the American
Journal of International Law, where you deal with the question of the Cambodian incursion, as you characterize it.
You say: "I think there is no reason to doubt that President Nixon had ample constitutional authority." And I am going to
come to other questions on intelligence and on other matters, and
again and again, you come down, it seems to me, very squarely on Executive authority.
You take the question if independent counsel, which is a big issue right now, for all the reasons that you know. And your testimony back before the 93d Congress, as it appears on page 450 of
hearings before the Judiciary Committee, you say that the establishment of a Special Prosecutor outside the executive branch would ultimately be held to be unconstitutional.
Judge BORK. Well, let me talk about that, Senator. I thought that was true. Of course, the statutes involved there were very different
from the statute we are operating under now—which I have not
looked at particularly, but I know it is very different. And what I
said was that a Special Prosecutor outside the executive branch
would be—I think it would be. I think that thing—those bills I was
talking about, I think, contemplated courts appointing, controlling
and removing Special Prosecutors, which I thought was not a Judi­cial function at all.
Now, I think I also testified, Senator, that in terms of congres­sional protection of a Special Prosecutor, it would be hard for Congress to protect him if he was an official nominated by and confirmed by the Senate, because the President's power over such officials is at a maximum. But I think I also testified that probably
Congress could protect a Special Prosecutor by statute so that he
could only be fired for cause, if he was a subordinate officer appointed by a department head. So I did not say you could not have a Special Prosecutor. I just
said under certain circumstances it would be difficult.
But may I—I want to say that the impression that I always rule
or side with the President is wrong. I have discussed at length, I
think, the episode that led me to tell the Attorney General that I
would not argue a pocket veto case, and that I filed a 12-page—or
8-page or whatever—analysis with the Attorney General, and he
forwarded it to the President, and we got President Ford to say he
would not use a pocket veto when Congress had left somebody
there during an adjournment or a recess to receive a return veto.
But also, I sat on a case in my court, the City of New Haven
case, in which the President was claiming the power to impound
funds, and that power to impound was in the statute, but also
there was a congressional veto. I voted with the majority that since
the congressional veto that Congress had was invalidated by
Chadha, the President's power to impound was lost, because the
Congress would never have given the President the power to impound if it had not had a legislative veto. So I voted with Congress
and against the President on that one. My record is not one of unvarying support for the executive
branch. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I have had a note from the Chairman that it is time for a short break, so I will yield back to the
Chairman at this time. Senator KENNEDY. We will have a 10-minute break.
Senator KENNEDY. The Senator from Pennsylvania, Mr. Specter,
will be recognized.Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge Bork, when we broke for the short recess we were talking
about the issue of executive and legislative authority and just another question or two on that subject. You wrote about the subject of reforming foreign intelligence—
again going back to the Wall Street Journal—and you commented
about the bill, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, where the
Congress was seeking to impose certain restraints upon executive
authority. You referred to the congressional action as a, "certain
lightheadedness.'' The issue is likely to come up soon on the matter of cover intelligence where the Intelligence Committee is trying to work out a
charter with the executive authority on what is timely notification,
a subject which was of very much concern in the recent Iran/
Contra hearings and some of us think really led to the execution of
the sale of arms to Iran because there had not been notification to
the Congress, and had there been oversight it would have been
stopped. Recently, the President wrote to the Intelligence Committee—
and this is just within the past few weeks—saying that there would
be new procedures; except in the most exceptional circumstances
timely notification will be given within two working days. I am sure there is going to be a controversy as to what are exceptional circumstances and I for one believe that this kind of a commitment has relatively little value because it leaves it up to the executive to decide what are exceptional circumstances. What I am
looking for is the reassurance that if you are confirmed and if any
of these cases get to the Supreme Court through the "standing
morass" issue, that as an Article III Justice you will give us a fair
shake.
I do not know how to articulate it any more directly than that.
Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I do not know how to say anything
more than I will give you a fair shake. I will give everybody a fair
shake.
Senator SPECTER. Well, I raise the question because of the writings which you have done but I think that these hearings are a
835
good occasion to focus for just a moment or two in our process of
checks and balances to give you at least this Senator's view of the
importance of having the Court make an ultimate decision in some
of these areas. I am not proposing that all of these are susceptible to judicial decision and I understand the political process and the tug of war
and I believe that that has a lot of applicability but I would restate
what Senator Byrd had articulated yesterday about the necessity in
some situations, short of missiles being in the air, for the Supreme
Court of the United States to take these cases, and if the Congress
and executive are irretrievably at loggerheads, for you to make the
 
decision. Judge Bork, now I would like to move on to the philosophical
area that you have written about and talked about a great deal,
and that is egalitarianism. I think it is very relevant on an understanding as to where you were heading on the equal protection
clause of the 14th amendment in terms of application. You have
questioned the desirability, as I read your writings on an egalitarian society. And one of your statements I would like your comment
about, the speech at Carlton College. You designated—and the materials provided us is 1977 or 1978—
and at page 7 you say the following:
Though it is obviously false, the trend of legislation continues to place increasing burdens upon business in the name of a wide variety of social ends, heavily freight­ed with the goal of redistribution, environmentalism, consumerism, energy control, racial equality, safety and health, investor protection, small business welfare and so on. Though each of these has much to be said for it, each has been over done and the costs are making business much less productive than before.
Now, you have handed down opinions on the environmental protection area to the contrary as to what you have generalized about
here. Judge BORK. Yes. Senator SPECTER. But I would invite your comment as to whether
you can ever really conclude that it has been, quote, "over done,"
unquote, with respect to some of these values, especially the value
of racial equality.Judge BORK. NO. I have no feeling that that has been over done,
Senator. I think what I was talking about there was that there
may be a lot of regulation which is desirable in and of itself, but in
the aggregate you may conceivably hamper business efficiency sufficiently that nobody will be better off because we will be a poorer
nation. I think I had just seen a study by the dean of the business school
which traced the decline in real constant dollars of shares of corporations—that is, the Dow Jones Index should now be at around
4,000 or 5,000 if it had kept up with inflation. And I was just
simply saying that that may suggest that the aggregate total regulation in the society may have damaged our efficiency and our ability to compete abroad and at home.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, in a speech that you Judge BORK. May I add, Senator, that has nothing to do with my
job as a judge. That was me talking in general about the society.
Senator SPECTER. Well, I understand that. But when you come to
apply principles of law and you do not have bright line tests and you have wavering lines, as you have described them before, philosophy may be the determinant factor in the ultimate decision by a
justice as you apply equal protection of the law with the fuzzy gradations that have been the subject of discussions in these hearing
rooms for hour after hour after hour. Does not the view that you express with some repetitiveness in
your speeches about an uneasiness or an opposition to the egalitarian principles, which you equate with permissiveness, really have a
very significant effect upon your own judicial philosophy? Judge BORK. I do not think so, Senator. For one thing, I was
really—I think when I am talking about these matters I am usually complaining about going too far toward equality of result. I
never have any problem with equality of opportunity. And I understand that even more equality of result than free process would
give us is desirable. Some redistribution is desirable, and it is not
for me as a judge to judge the degree of redistribution. As you say, on my present court I have repeatedly upheld regulations of business—repeatedly. And it would have been possible to
write those decisions the other way, but I would not have felt that
it was the law. Senator SPECTER. Well, as a Supreme Court Justice you are going
to have considerably more authority and latitude than as a Court
of Appeals judge and that is why I raise the question, because it is
so dominant in the speaking which you have given. And repetitively the issue arises about your opposition to what you define as egalitarian principles. You do not spell them out as they would relate necessarily to decisions, but taking at look at the speech you made at Yale University on April 24, you talk about values as measured in the survey
are quite egalitarian and permissive. Judge BORK. What is, Senator? I missed part of that sentence. Senator SPECTER. YOU are talking about values as measured in a
survey—a Public Opinion survey—and with some repetitiveness
you refer to the—as you do here at page 5—to the left liberal, and
from time to time your speeches refer to the press and to the professorial ranks as having a very heavy orientation to the left. You
talk about that philosophically in terms of an egalitarian principle
and as permissive. As you say at page 6: "Their values as measured in this survey
are quite egalitarian and permissive." My question to you is, if you care to elaborate upon what you
mean here, what would be the predictability or your expectation as
you would apply this kind of a philosophy, if any, in the interpretation of equal protection of the law.
Judge BORK. I do not think there is any, Senator. What I was
saying here was—there was a survey in the Public Opinion Magazine in which in every election since 1968 over 80 percent, and
often well over 80 percent of people working in the media and the
press voted for the democratic candidate, which I thought was a
relevant statistic in this connection. Senator SPECTER. YOU thought it was what? Judge BORK. A relevant statistic in what I was talking about
here. But, you know, when I have faced the freedom of the press
the press has done very well. It does not affect my attitude toward the press as a constitutional matter, and it does not affect my atti­tude toward regulatory agencies. And as far as the equal protection clause is concerned, I do not regard that as requiring equality of result. I regard that as requiring equality of opportunity, if that distinction makes any sense in that context.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, going back to your Carlton College speech, you have this sentence which is really illustrative of a fair amount of your philosophy.
You say, quote—this is the bottom of page 10: "Men in democra­cies"—well, you quote De Toqueville on this, but with apparent ap­proval—"Men in democracies"—well, you insert it in your writing, I guess you are quoting De Toqueville—"are well aware of the danger of anarchy inherent in a condition of equality."
My question is, aside from your articulation of equality of oppor­tunity, what impact does your overall philosophy of equality have as you would interpret the equal protection clause of the 14th amendment?
Judge BORK. None whatever. I have told this committee how I would interpret the clause. I think what I was saying in this Carl­ton speech was that if you try to enforce too much equality of result through statute and regulation, De Toqueville said that you—this is him: "You cover the surface of the society with a net­work of small, complicated rules, minute and uniform, through which the most original minds and the most energetic characters cannot penetrate. The will of man is not shattered, but softened, bent and guided."
I do not think we are on that road any more. I thought for awhile that this drive towards more regulation of everything was going to continue for a long, long time. I do not think it has.
Senator SPECTER. Then de-regulation came in in 1981. Judge BORK. Even the state of regulation where it stood was less worrisome to me than I thought what might be a continuing trend.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, let me take up just one more philo­sophical issue that you have written about and written about ex­tensively—there is not time enough to go into other matters—and I would refer to the speech you made at the University of Chicago on November 13, 1984.
This picks up a thread which you write about with repetitiveness on John Stuart Mill and his book on liberty and the privatization of morality away from governmental regulation. Picking up at page 10, you write this:
One thinks of developments in free-speech doctrine in which it has been held that government may not, for example, deal with obscenity and pornography except in the most extreme cases because, as one opinion puts it, cne man's vulgarity is an­other man's lyric
The Justice Harlan quotation that you referred to otherwise.
Then you go on to write:
One notes in the rise of the so-called right-to-privacy cases which deal mainly with sexual morality and which generally conclude that sexual morality may be reg­ulated only in extreme cases. All of these trends, from interpretations of the reli­gious clauses, to readings of the speech clause, to the privacy cases share the common theme that morality is not usually the business of the government but is, instead, primarily the concern of the individual. Whether or not so intended, these cases may be seen as representing the privatization of morality.
And then you go on to talk about John Stuart Mill's "On Liberty" and as I read your writings—and I am going to have to boil this
down because of time limitations and ask you for your interpretation—you seem to me to object to the privatization of morality and
you look for more governmental authority on matters like pornography as opposed to hardcore obscenity, which the first amendment
cannot reach. And you look to more governmental regulation on
matters, as you put it, of sexual morality. You do not like the stringent application of the establishment
clause and the free exercise clause which you come to later on page
11, that, as you articulate, the principles of majority rule—Madisonian majoritarianism, as you write so frequently—that you object
to the interpretations of the law privatizing morality as it would
apply in those cases—sexual conduct, speech, pornography and religion. The thrust of my question is, where does that leave you in terms
of sitting on the Supreme Court, if confirmed, on enforcing majority rule in a context where the Court has cut back very sharply on
State legislative activity in all of those lines? Judge BORK. Well, Senator, I did not denounce those things. I
said that these were aspects of a privatization of morality. It is a
trend, I think. Senator SPECTER. Well, you speak about—you do denounce Harlan's "one man's vulgarity is another man's lyric." Judge BORK. That is right.Senator SPECTER. And you do denounce the privatization of morality in terms of excessive sexual conduct, and you do not come to
a conclusion on the religion cases. You raise the question. Judge BORK. Well, let me say about that—I guess our time is
short so I will try to do it briefly. As I said yesterday, it seems to
me very odd to say that a reason why a community may not
punish what was an obscenity, I think, is that one man s obscenity
is another man's lyric. That is an odd statement. That means that
if anybody thinks it is a lyric you cannot punish obscenity. Senator SPECTER. NO, only if the Supreme Court thinks it is. Judge BORK. Well, I know. But the reason they gave was that one
man's lyric is another man's obscenity. On the establishment and
free exercise clauses, I did not criticize those at all. All I said was—
and it is a common observation that has been made by law professors and justices—is that they have managed to get them into a position where they conflict with each other. And it just seems to me
as a matter of doctrine it would be nice if the two major clauses
about religion did not conflict. Senator SPECTER. YOU do not make that point in this speech.
Your Yodell point on the Supreme Court decision you make otherwise but not here. In this speech you are really looking to the concept of privatization and morality which does not give the majority,
the State legislative bodies, authority to deal with religious issues.
Judge BORK. IS this the speech at—oh, yes, the University of Chicago, Religion in the Law. I think in that speech later on, Senator,
I think I explicitly said, one of the odd things—I know I said it at
Brookings and I think I said it here—and the reason I say the same
thing so much is not that I am obsessed with the point Senator. It
is that I give speeches and I cannot keep writing a new one every time and I tend to shuffle the paragraphs around and give the
same speech.Senator SPECTER. Those of us who read your 80 speeches were appreciative.Judge BORK. But in any event—well, I do not see it. I cannot find
it right here and I do not want to take up your time hunting for it.
Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, I really do not think you make
that point here about the conflict Judge BORK. Well, I meant to. Senator SPECTER. Between the free exercise and the
establishment clauses. I think the point you are really making
there—and you do not come to a conclusion but you are suggest-
ing—that the concerns you have about the privatization of morality which you expressed in "one man's lyric is another man's," et
cetera, apply in the field of religion as well. Judge BORK. NO. I do not think they apply in the field of religion
except for the fact I—the reason I am sure I said this about the
conflict between the clauses is that I was asking how they could
have got themselves to a point where, under the free exercise
clause, a State was required to do what if it had done on its own
would have violated the establishment clause. On page 7 and 8, Senator, of that talk I discussed the case ofWisconsin v. Yoder and I was making the observation which many professors have made—my speeches get less original as I get busier; I
tend to use other people's thoughts—I made the point which others
have made that when the Supreme Court said that the free exercise clause required Wisconsin to make a special exception for the
Amish to let their school children out early before they were 16,
that was an exception which if Wisconsin had made for the Amish
in its statute book would probably have been held to be a violation
of the establishment clause. It is a conventional point and it has been made by others many
times before. Senator SPECTER. I am familiar with that point, Judge Bork, but
you move from that point to another point when you go three or
four pages later to pages 10 or 11. And then you take up the concept of privatization of morality, which is different from the conflict of establishment and free exercise. Judge BORK. Oh, yes. Senator SPECTER. It is plain that you have objected to Harlan's
conclusion about one man's vulgarity is another man's lyric under
the privatization concept. And then you move from that into the discussion of the,
". . . stringent application of the establishment clause"—this is at
page 11—"one might expect then the privatization by a stringent
application of the establishment clause to keep the community
through government from advancing religion, and an equally or
almost stringent application of the free exercise clause to permit
the individual maximum freedom in his beliefs," which leads me to
the inference that you do not like the stringent application of establishment or free exercise, although I readily concede you do not
say so. It is a suggestion.
Judge BORK. I not only do not say so, Senator, what I was doing
here was suggesting that perhaps a general mood of privatization of morality was leading—I was trying to explain how could these
two clauses have gotten themselves in a condition where they con­tradicted each other. That is all I was trying to explain.
Then I go on to say that the Bill of Rights is itself a way of priva­tizing some aspects of morality, and that is fine. Senator SPECTER. Judge Bork, as I was afraid I was going to run
out of time, I have only got four minutes left. So let me just make a few concluding observations.
But I want to compliment you for being so cooperative with this committee. I believe that these hearings will set a new standard for
Supreme Court nominees, which I think is really important. Last
year, on the record, I expressed concern about the proceedings as to Justice Scalia not being able to get into issues.
You came to talk to me for more than 3 hours privately. We were interrupted on the first occasion by a vote, and I have had the
opportunity to question you for more than 3 hours now. Not that it
is necessarily enough, but you have been very generous with your
time and, more than the generosity with your time, you have been in responsiveness.
I think you have really dealt with the questions as best you can on very complex subjects, not to say that all the answers are going
to please all of us, and I think you have had tough questions, perhaps questions at the belt—I don't think that they have been below
the belt—by the committee. Depending on your perspective or
someone's perspective there might be some differences to that, but you have tried to respond to the questions.
The hearings present a real opportunity for the Senators to tell you what is on our minds, and to tell you what is on the minds of
our constituents, as we really expressed them, and the one opportunity we have. And I know it is an experience—I will remember it, and I am sure you will remember it.
And when you talk, as you did, about a powerful argument from a strong tradition, perhaps that will have some influence as you
consider some of the doctrines, as you apply them in the future—
on the Supreme Court, if confirmed; and on the District of Colum­bia Court, if you are not confirmed.
Judge Bork, I have not made up my mind on the confirmation process as of this moment. At the outset, I was very concerned
about what I considered to be a sharp variance on your writings as opposed to the tradition of U.S. constitutional jurisprudence.
You have made significant shifts in accordance with this testimo­ny which I think, candidly, has to be evaluated. We don't expect a
man to be in concrete on his thinking, and I understand that what
you had written in the past was speculative and tentative, and I
respect that. And I also respect the consideration that law professors—you, as a professor, and those today and those in the future
have to be free to write in a vibrant, lusty manner without being
concerned that should they come to the Senate Caucus Room for a
confirmation proceeding that they will be ruled out of consideration for the Supreme Court of the United States.
The issue of equal protection of the laws is a very important one,
and I think that—and I know that your testimony in this room is
materially different from what you had written. You had written
that equal protection applied only in a racial context, and you have testified here today about your willingness to apply it to women
and to aliens and beyond race and ethnic consideration. We have questioned you at great length, and there are few questions and answers that I am going to reread, and that is one area.
You have testified extensively on the first amendment, and I have
questioned you extensively on the issue of original intent and
whether you really can use original intent to decide the cases and
whether you really can use legislative intent; and my suggestion to
you is that they only take you so far, and beyond that you can rely
on Cardozo or Frankfurter to effectuate the values and the tradition of the people without being able to pull out a specific constitutional right which would guarantee privacy. And of course, you
have to decide that, if you are confirmed. If I had to boil down, perhaps, the crux of an issue which I have
to think about, and we look for predictability, and you pose a very
unique situation here because you have written more extensively, I
believe, than any nominee who has come to this position. And we
search for predictability, and that is our job. And personalities have to be put aside. On this Senate Judiciary
Committee we have a responsibility to uphold the Constitution, just
as you do as a judge, and the personalities are all out. And there is a question of what risk is involved, risk to the Constitution and risk to the Court, and that is a judgment which has to
be made. When you and I talked extensively about Brandenburg v.
Ohio and we traced the history of the Holmes opinion on clear and
present danger, and we went through Abrams and Git low and
Dennis to Brandenburg and to Hess, and you said that you accepted
the principle of Brandenburg and you would apply it but you disagreed with the philosophy. And a concern I have is that when the next set of facts come
up—and they aren't going to be exactly like Brandenburg because
no two cases are exactly alike on the facts—if you disagree with
the philosophy, how will you decide the case. And you answered it
I think the only way a man can answer it: You are going to do
your best to uphold your oath of office and to uphold the Constitution and to uphold the principle of the Brandenburg case. I don't know that there is any better answer that any man can
give, and, as a Senator on this panel, I have to weigh that. That
really is an ultimate consideration. In closing, I would call your attention to the case of Turner v.
Saffley, which is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United
States handed down on June 1, 1987, just a couple of months ago. It
involves the right of an inmate marriage regulation in the Missouri jails. And it is an opinion written by Justice O'Connor and it
turns, as I read the case, on due process grounds. And it holds that the Missouri inmate marriage regulation is
unduly restrictive, and it is joined in by Chief Justice Rehnquist,
Justice Scalia, Justice White and Justice Powell.
I would say that to reach the level of a constitutional right on an
inmate marriage regulation goes a fair distance beyond what is articulated in the Constitution of the United States. And I would
hope that, if you are confirmed, that there will be a broader view
than specifically articulated rights in the Constitution, the Cardozo
view, the Frankfurter view, the O'Connor view, even the Rehnquist view and the Scalia view; that it is really the needs of the nation
which you articulate and you will accept. And the commerce
clause, I would hope as a Justice you would accept and articulate, if confirmed, in a broader range of cases.
I am not saying how you decide them because you may decide the right of privacy doesn't extend to abortion. But the authority of
the Court to decide these constitutional questions and the recognition of rights which are not spelled out in minute detail would be your lodestone.
Thank you very much, Judge Bork. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Judge BORK. Senator, may I just say one word? I agree with a great deal of what you say, I just want to talk about—you talk
about significant shifts. I really haven't shifted that much. I have
told you where I have changed my mind, explicitly political speech, and so forth.
I think the difference is my role. As a judge, I accept lines of precedent that I criticized as a professor, and that is a shift in my role rather than a shift in everything I have ever thought.
Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chair­man. Senator KENNEDY. Judge Bork, you asked us to judge you on your record as judge rather than on your record as a professor.
And, as you told Senator Thurmond yesterday, and I quote: "In the
classroom, no one gets hurt; in a courtroom, somebody always does, and that is a wholly different function than being a professor."
It appears that in your courtroom ordinary Americans have fre­quently been hurt. We heard about the sterilization case yesterday, and I would like to ask you briefly about two other cases.
The first is the Bartlett v. Bowen case in which you ruled that a senior citizen could be kept out of court when her medicare benefits are unconstitutionally denied. Josephine Newman, of the Christian Science faith, suffered from a terminal illness which required
skilled nursing care. She died and the executor of her estate filed a
medicare claim, and the claim was denied because she had earlier
received medicare benefits for a previous stay in a Christian Sci­ence facility.
Her executor, named Bartlett, brought a lawsuit claiming that the denial of benefits violated her first amendment right to the
free exercise of religion, and your court ruled that her estate was
entitled to pursue her claim in federal court and that the medicare
law was not intended to stop senior citizens from taking their con­stitutional claims to court.
Judge Bork, you dissented from that decision and ruled that a sick, elderly American could be denied all access to a federal court to challenge an unconstitutional denial of her medicare benefits.
My question is a simple one. Aren't all Americans, including senior citizens, entitled to their day in court? Judge BORK. They certainly are, Senator Kennedy. It should be
said that I didn't deny that woman access to court. I wish she had
had access to court. The statute passed by Congress said if you had
a claim for less than $1,000 you could not go to court. That seemed
to me very clear. It is flat on the face of the statute, and there is
an ancient doctrine of sovereign immunity when the suit is against the Federal Treasury that says Congress may deny access to courts to make a claim against the Federal Treasury.
I would have been delighted to hear that case if the statute hadn't said she had no right to bring it.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, the fact is that there is a cut-off amount
of $1,000 approximately, but the case was raised under a constitutional issue, under the free exercise clause. The court majority
ruled that the Congress did not cut off the judicial review when
constitutional claims were at issue. That is what the majority ruled, and I quote:
"Challenges to the constitutionality of the Medicare Act itself may be reviewed in federal court consistent with congressional intent as expressed in the Act."
So the majority of the court found that the constitutional issues were sufficiently significant and important to consider, rather than the limitation of $1,000, which is written into the law.
Judge BORK. I would have been delighted to do that, Senator, except the statute was flat, no review, and the legislative history
showed no intention to make an exception for constitutional
claims. And I thought it was an exercise of Congress' power of sov­ereign immunity.
I think most of our full court agreed with me because six judges voted to rehear that case en bane. Then one judge later said it
wasn't important enough and shifted his vote, so we only had five votes to hear it en bane.
But that is, you know, if a statute that is flat, $1,000 or no review and no legislative history indicating a contrary intent, must
be read to have an exception, I can't imagine a cut-off statute that will ever be upheld.
But, I mean, you know, it is up to Congress. If they want to say unless it is a constitutional claim, I will be delighted to hear it. Senator KENNEDY. Well, clearly the majority drew the conclusion that it was the intent.
Judge BORK. Oh, yes, the majority did.
Senator KENNEDY. That is what a majority of the court decided, and I think it is quite clear that that is what Congress had intend­ed.
Now I would like to ask you about your ruling on worker safety in the Prill case. Ken Prill was a truck driver with a good work
record. After complaining repeatedly about the unsafe conditions of his truck, Prill had an accident. His truck jack-knifed and two ve­hicles ended up in a ditch, and the accident was caused by the unsafe condition of the truck, not through any fault of Mr. Prill.
And after complaining again to his supervisors, Mr. Prill went to the Tennessee Public Service Commission. The commission issued a
citation to the company for operating an unsafe vehicle; and for
bringing this matter to the attention of the public agency, Mr. Prill
was fired.
Mr. Prill brought an unfair labor suit against his employer, and
a majority of your court supported his claim. You dissented from
that opinion. You took the view that the labor laws do not protect
a worker in Mr. Prill's situation from reporting his unsafe truck to
the proper authority.
My question is simple. Why not?
Judge BORK. Well, the statute, as I recall that case—by the way,
I agreed with the National Labor Relations Board, so I wasn't out
there by myself. And I was giving deference to the administrative
agency that decided this case. And, as I recall the statute protects concerted activity, and this
was one person acting. And it seemed odd to the Board, and to me,
to say that one person acting was concerted activity. It is purely a
question of statutory construction, with which I agreed with the
relevant federal agency. Senator KENNEDY. Well, the majority of your court took a different view. They, as I understand, viewed the situation that when
truck drivers and other drivers report unsafe conditions it protects
their fellow workers. It protects all those that may be driving that
truck, and that is certainly a matter of concern; let alone those
people who are going to be using the highways, for their safety as
well. We want to feel safe, Judge Bork, not only on the roads, but in
the courts as well. Judge BORK. Senator, I quite agree with you. The problem is the
statute seemed to the Board and to me to be clear, and in keeping
with my view of my function as applying the law as written and
not making up social policy, I tried to follow the statute, as did the
Board. Senator KENNEDY. But the majority of the court differed? Judge BORK. The majority of the court differed. Senator KENNEDY. They, as I believe, held that the concerted activity requirement would be satisfied by the fact that there would
be other drivers driving the truck and that the public interest in
terms of using the highways would be affected. Well, Judge Bork, in my remarks yesterday I emphasized the
concern that many of us have about, whether Judge Bork can be
fair if he becomes Justice Bork and whether he has sufficiently
genuine commitment to the basic individual rights that we have as
Americans and that are at the heart of our democracy and freedom. We are not a perfect society, but the overwhelming majority of
Americans are proud of the progress we have made in recent decades in making this a better land in achieving a greater measure of
racial justice and providing genuine equality for women, in guaranteeing the right to vote free from poll taxes and literacy tests, and
in protecting the basic liberties such as freedom of speech and freedom of religion, and in some ways the most fundamental right of
all in a free society, the right to privacy and the right to be free
from intrusions by the government into the most fundamental and
personal aspects of our private lives. We are all aware of the enormous power that a Supreme Court
Justice has, and over the past five days Judge Bork has shown us
that he is a brilliant lawyer. But the controversy over Judge Bork
is intense because Americans care very deeply about their basic
rights, and we do not want to risk the danger that Judge Bork will
misuse the Supreme Court as a platform to turn the clock and require us to refight the settled battles of the past.
I want to close by quoting some words by the man whose integrity and whose commitment to the rule of law cast such a long
845
shadow over Judge Bork in these proceedings. Archibald Cox de­clined to testify here for reasons that all of us respect. Professor Cox cares deeply about the rule of law and he does not want this to appear to be a personal contest between himself and Judge Bork.
But in a new book that he has just finished, Archibald Cox com­ments on the fundamental principle at issue in appointments to the Supreme Court and other federal courts, and I would like to read one brief passage from his book.
To pack the bench with men and women of a single narrow political ideology has a tendency to erode long range public confidence in judicial institutions. The legiti­macy of judicial decrees depends on public confidence that the judges are predomi­nantly engaged, not in making personal political judgments, but in applying a body of law. The farther a President goes in proclaiming an intent to predetermine the course of decisions, the more he will undercut the foundations of legitimacy. The avowed selection of judges whose minds are already closed on the cases that may come before them in the future erodes the respect and support for judicial rulings that flow from public confidence that cases submitted for adjudication are being de­cided by individuals with open minds as free as humanly possible from political or economic self-interest, from the obligations of loyalty to a political party or other organization, and from most forms of ambition.
And I think that most Americans would agree with Archibald Cox, and I think most Americans would agree that the man who fired Archibald Cox does not deserve to be promoted to Justice on the Supreme Court.
Judge BORK. I have explained, Senator, that I fired Archibald Cox not because of any animus or any desire to stop the investiga­tions. I have repeatedly explained that I was the last man in the Department who could hold the Department together. I then spent a lot of time trying to hold the Watergate special prosecution force together. It was held together. It went forward with the results we all know.
Now, as to that passage from Professor Cox, I agree with it en­tirely. I wish I could write it that well.
Senator KENNEDY. Senator Hatch?
Senator HATCH. Thank you, Senator Kennedy.
Now, Judge, we are coming down to the last few minutes of what has been almost 35 hours sitting in front of this panel. I think the longest of anybody I remember. And I might add, you have handled it with equanimity and good grace, humor, and I think with some confrontation from some people who maybe confronted you the wrong way, and certainly have been loose with their own interpre­tation of cases and the facts.
C.W. Corham once said that "Genius is the ability to reduce the complicated to the simple," and that is exactly what you have been doing for about 35 hours of actual sitting in front of us.
At this point, Mr. Chairman, I would like to point the unanimous
pro labor case record of the Judge into the record. Senator KENNEDY. Without objection, so ordered.
Senator HATCH. And I might also comment, as the former Chairman of the Labor Committee and ranking member on it now, that I
think it is unseemly for anybody to think that every plaintiff has
to win every case a plaintiff brings. There are laws and even plaintiffs are bound by those laws. I think that has to be pointed out.
And anybody who doesn't understand that, doesn't understand the
law. And I think you well explained those two cases. Let me just you a couple of questions. I don't intend to take all
the time. I have 15 minutes. Senator Simpson has 15 minutes.
But it has been intimated that a judge may not fairly apply a
statute with which he disagrees or thinks pernicious. I must say no
judge agrees with the policy of all the statutes he has to apply. For
example, one would not say—I don't think anyone would say that
Judge Abner Mikva, a colleague of yours on the court of appeals,
and a former Congressman, could not fairly interpret or apply a
law which he voted against as a Congressman. I think anybody
would say he could not fairly do that. I wouldn't, and I don't think
any other member of this committee would. Do you agree with
that? Judge BORK. Certainly I agree with that. Senator HATCH. And it shouldn't be said about you, either, just
because you are up for the Supreme Court. We heard yesterday that you should have deferred with regard
to the American Cyanamid case, that you should have deferred to
the Secretary of Labor on the question of offering a woman a
choice in work hazard situations. I have checked the documents in that case, and the Secretary of
Labor had not filed a brief or in any way come before the court.
Now how can you defer to a view if it is never presented to the
court. Could you also further explain your views on that subject? Judge BORK. On the Cyanamid case? Senator HATCH. Yes. Judge BORK. Well, I have it here, Senator. I think it is important
that perhaps people understand it. It was a case, as you know, involving a plant with a very high
lead level in one department. And the question was—and the company gave the women a choice, and the question was whether that
was a violation of the hazardous conditions policy of the OSHA
Act. This was a case with no satisfactory solution for anybody. I
mean, there was just nothing to—there was no satisfactory way to
solve it. Our court did not endorse the policy of the company. The
policy was to protect fetuses by telling women that they—if they
wanted to remain in the—they could not remain—if they were
childbearing age, they could not remain in that department unless
they were sterilized. But they had a choice.
That was a—that policy was not before us. We didn't have to
choose. The best solution would have been to reduce the lead levels.
I said that in the opinion. But the evidence before us supported the
finding of the Commission, that the lead levels could not be further
reduced. If you tried to reduce them further, you would have to
close the department.
So the company and the workers were both faced with what I
called in my opinion a most unhappy choice. Shut down the depart­merit, which would put everybody out of work, including a lot of women who had no—who were not of childbearing age, and have a devastating effect, perhaps, on a lot of families in the area, and children, or develop a policy that would protect women of child­bearing years.
I would not want to be an official of that company trying to make that choice. I wouldn't want to be a worker faced with the choice. And fortunately, as judges, we were not faced with that choice.
There were several statutes that might have been involved, and I said in my opinion that there were other statutes that might apply besides the OSHA Act, and, in fact, some other statutes—some other cases were brought on that.
The administrative Commission that was assigned by Congress to make the decision found that the law had not been violated. And under the terms of the statute, we were not free to overrule that decision.
So let me, if I may, just read from the opinion. I think it is im­portant that people understand what I decided.
Senator HATCH. All right.
Judge BORK. This is my opinion. It is important to understand the context in which this case arose and the task that is set for this court. American Cyanamid found, and the administrative law judge agreed, that it could not reduce ambient lead levels in one of its departments sufficiently to eliminate the risk of serious harm to fe­tuses carried by women employees.
The company was thus faced with unattractive alternatives. It could remove all women of childbearing age from that department, a decision that would have entailed discharging some of them and giving others reduced pay at other jobs, or the company could at­tempt to mitigate the severity of this outcome by offering contin­ued employment in the department to women who were surgically sterilized. The company chose the latter alternative, and the women involved were thus faced with a distressing choice. Some chose sterilization, some did not.
This is still continuing: As we understand the law, we are not free to make a legislative judgment. We may not, on the one hand, decide that the company is innocent because it chose to let the women decide for themselves which course was less harmful to them, nor may we decide that the company is guilty because it offered an option of steriliza­tion that the women might ultimately regret choosing. These are moral issues of no small complexity, but they are not for us. Congress has enacted a statute and our only task is the mundane one of interpreting its language and applying its policy.
Then I said at the end of the opinion: It is clear that American Cyanamid had to prevent exposure to lead of women of childbearing age, and furthermore, that the company could not have been charged under the Act if it accomplished that by discharging the women or simply by closing the department, thus putting all employees who worked there, including women of childbearing age, out of work. The company was charged only because it offered the women a choice.
Then I said,
Counsel for the union stated at oral argument that there would have been no vio­lation if the company had simply stated that only sterile women would be employed because there would have been no requirement of" sterilization.
We agree that such an announcement would not have involved a violation of the general duty clause of the statute, but we fail to see how that policy differs under the statute from the one Ameri­can Cyanamid adopted. An "only sterile women" announcement would also have given women of childbearing age the option of sur­gical sterilization.
The only difference between that case and this case is that here the company pointed out the option and provided information about it. It cannot be that the employer is better shielded from li­ability the less information it provides. The case might be different if American Cyanamid had offered the choice in an attempt to pass on to its employees the cost of maintaining a lead concentration higher than that permitted by law. But that is not this case. The company could not reduce lead concentrations to a level that posed an acceptable risk to fetuses.
So the company offered this option, but not as an attempt to pass on costs of un­lawful conduct, but to permit the employees to mitigate costs to them imposed by unavoidable physiological facts. The women involved in this matter were put through a most unhappy choice, but no statute regresses all grievances and we must decide cases according to law.
I just wanted to make it clear what that case held, Senator, because there is some thought that we approved a policy. We did not.
The only question was whether the Commission was correct in deciding that this particular statutory provision had not been violat­ed, and we thought it was.
Senator HATCH. Well, I will reserve the balance of my time. But I also just point out that that was the unanimous, 3-judge decision as
well. But I think that explains that case, and it should take the
emotion out of it that I think was unfairly used yesterday against you, as we have seen throughout these proceedings.
So I will reserve the balance of my time, and Senator Simpson has the remaining 15 minutes. The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Wyoming? Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, did your son win the game, or
his team? The CHAIRMAN. They won the game, and there was a goal line stand on the 2-yard line for four downs, and that is why I am later
than I was supposed to be. We will get you to the Boston College game quickly.
Judge BORK. All right.
Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, it is odd to me after a dazzling 5 days of listening, and it has been an education and like going to law school for me in many
ways. Because in the private practice in Cody, Wyoming, for 18
years, you really don't do too many constitutional cases. Not many
at all.
But really, to think that in the last day and a half we have
talked about somehow that you favor sterilization of women, what
an absurd situation that we could get to in this place? Trigger
words, charged words, high emotion—and somehow that you, if you
had your way, would sterilize men and women in the United
States. That is beyond my comprehension how we get to that, but
that is what we do.
And you remember when we started this I said, and it may be shocking but it is sure real to me, you either pass or kill a bill and you either confirm or reject an appointee to the United States Su­preme Court apparently—didn't think it went this far, but it does in legislation—by using a deft blend of emotion, fear, guilt or racism. That is the way—I didn't think it worked with Supreme Court nominees. I knew it worked that way with legislation. I found that. But I didn't think it went that far with this.
And then, of course—and I shared it with you last night—to see that the dramatic telegram that was generated yesterday was done by the attorney for the woman who called her—and this lady was the lady attorney, Joan Bertin—called the woman and was her at­torney in the Cyanamid case and told her to send a telegram to the Senate Judiciary Committee, and then Ms. Bertin, the lawyer, pre­pared the wire that we got and it says things like "Judge Bork thinks we were glad to have the choice of getting sterilized or get­ting fired. Only a judge who knows about women who need to work could say that".
Then it says, "It's incredible. The judge, who is supposed to be fair, can support a company that doesn't follow the OSHA rules", and you have described all that. "It is the most awful thing that happened to me". It would have a greater ring of clarity if it were prepared by the person, but it was prepared by her attorney.
And I said last night, and I say again, that when an attorney prepares the text of something like that and was the attorney for the person and then to make it look like some voluntary wire that came forward out of, you know, whatever, I think that is offensive to me.
Well, let me share with you that, when I was in the Wyoming Legislature we adopted a thing called the Missouri Plan on the Se­lection of judges. There was a reason for that. It was to take judges out of politics. We spent decades trying to get judges out of politics. It has happened all over the United States. The States have gone further than, obviously, we have here, and that is really sad.
Because all this is, is politics right here. Nothing more, nothing less, not one whit. So we tried to take them out of politics so they wouldn't have to go up by direct election, which they did in many States—we appointed judicial selection committees, blue ribbon committees—because we all finally realized that judges who run for the supreme court of the States or run for district court judge are not very good at the plant gate with pamphlets in their hand. They really don't cut the mustard.
They are not too good at rallies, either. Kind of don't get down to the nub of things. They are not very good at pumping hands in the streets. We politicians like that. That is how we live. That is our lifeblood. That is our plasma.
So we tried to remove judges from that all over the United States, but not here in these proceedings. And you are deeply, deeply in politics here. Nothing more, nothing less. Let no one miss what is happening. And we will never come this way again.
I am as excited about my ability to participate in this as Arlen Specter has indicated. We will never see it again. This will never happen again. Doesn't matter whether you are confirmed or reject­ed.
Because the next time we have a Supreme Court nominee he or
she will say: "There is a limitation to my response to this committee, and I do not believe as a nominee I can tell you how I might
vote on a particular issue which may come before the Court or endorse or criticize specific Supreme Court decisions presenting issues
which may well come before the Court again"; or "How I might resolve a particular issue or what I might do in a future Court action
might make it necessary for me to disqualify myself on the matter
and that would result in my inability to do my sworn duty, namely,
to decide cases that come before the Court"; or to say "I suggest
that none of us really know how we would resolve any particular
issue. At the very least, we would reserve judgment at that time,
and I will not discuss how the statute will be interpreted in the
future." Those are the remarks of Justice O'Connor at her confirmation. Justice Scalia said: "I do not think I should, Senator, respond to
the question because that may well be an issue argued before the
Court and I do not want to be in the position of having in connection as a condition of my confirmation giving an indication of how
I would come out on it." And the Senator responded: "I understand that." And that question was then shunted aside.
Then Judge Scalia said, as anyone will in the future and has always in the past, say, "I just cannot do it, and I think the only
way to be sure that I am not impairing my ability to be impartial,
and to be regarded as impartial in future cases before the Court, is
simply respectfully decline to give an opinion on whether any of
the existing law on the Supreme Court is right or wrong." And
that was the end of that line of questioning. That was it. School was out.
And then Judge Rehnquist, and I am only citing the most recent three, he said: "Senator, I was reluctantly willing to answer your
questions about the first amendment questions. I am a good deal
more reluctant to venture an answer that would be any sort of a
broader classification. In effect, I must say I am very much inclined to think that I best ought not."
That is the rest of our history right there, so we will never see this again. But what we have seen, again, is more of the authentic
man or woman than we will ever see in a Supreme Court Justice nominee, and that has been exciting.
So I guess that next time and every time before we would have the same answers to the same questions, and especially they will be accepted by us, as they have in the past, and the sad thing is that we will not get a chance to really deal—and they will be more
accepted by us if they have written nothing, done nothing and said
nothing.
Is not that a tragedy?
We will get—you know, I do not know what we will get. Hopefully we will do well—and I think we will—under any future President—but we will never get the yeast and the zip that we have had
here.
The Indiana Law Journal, this remarkable piece—well, you
know, I referred to that. And what you said about it. You said it
was a general theory. You said it was ranging shots. You said it
was an attempt to stimulate. You said it is informal, presented in853
formally, as original remarks and lectures. "I did not think it
worthwhile to convert these speculations and arguments into any
heavily researched, balanced and thorough presentation," you
wrote. You said that, but nobody has ever talked about that. Not once.
And at the end of the article, you said it was tentative and exploratory, and they have been hammering you with that thing for 5
days. Well, I think it will be a good lesson to anyone that thinks of
wanting to be on the Supreme Court, and I am sure there are
young people and young lawyers and non-lawyers who would like
to be on the Supreme Court. It would be interesting, too, whether they have had their goal a
little chilled in this process. That would be interesting for me to
know. But anyway, we are searching for predictability. I think that was
a fair phrase and you ascribed to it. We are not searching for perfection. Everyone of us at this table have flunked that test, period.
All of us, some publicly, some privately, but all of us, all 14 have
flunked the test of perfection. Some may say that they have not, but they may believe it, but I
do not believe it. So I will not tell about being on federal probation
for shooting those mail boxes when I was 18. I will leave that out.
Then, you know, assault and battery charge when I was in the
University of Wyoming, it was not my fault.  In those days I weighed 260 and had hair and thought beer was
food and was omnipotent.  And I have got the scars on my head to show for that. And that
is the way it is. It is called real life, and there is not anybody that
does not understand that, nowhere. Well, I did have some questions, but even though my good friend
from Utah was good enough to toss me a little extra time, I just
wanted to—there was one area that needed just a swift answer,
and that is the area of the Human Life Bill. It seemed to me when
you testified against that, it was a classic example of not letting
your personal preferences influence your interpretation. Was that
not what that was? Judge BORK. Well, I Senator SIMPSON. The Human Life Bill. Judge BORK. I do not know that I should talk about my personal
preferences, but it was certainly a proceeding in which I testified
entirely on constitutional grounds. Senator SIMPSON. Well, I will conclude. But there is an old poem that I—and hang on tight because I am not going to go into romance—but the poem "If by Rudyard Kipling is a dandy, and if
you read it when you are 21 and then read it about every 5 years
afterwards, it has ever more meaning as you chamber it inside of
yourself.
Just a couple of lines from that. Of course, the openers are the
greatest ones for you:
If you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs and blaming it on you; if you can trust yourself when all men doubt you and yet make allowance for their doubting, too; if you can wait and not be tired by waiting, or being lied about
don't deal in lies, or being hated, don't give way to hating, and yet don't look too good nor talk too wise. That is good stuff. And it is all good stuff. But the other one is:
If you can bear to hear the truth you have spoken twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools; or watch the things you gave your life too broken and stoop and build them up with worn out tools;
and so it is, and: If you can walk with crowds and keep your virtue, or walk with kings nor lose the common touch; if neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you; if all men count with you, but none too much. and, of course: If you can fill the unforgiving minute with 60 seconds worth of distance run, yours is the earth and all that is in it; and what is more, you will be a man, my son. It is a good one. I read it to my three children and it seems topical and important here. And I have one final question. Why do you want to be an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court? Judge BORK. Senator, I guess the answer to that is that I have
spent my life in intellectual pursuits in the law and since I have
been a judge, I particularly like the courtroom. I liked the courtroom as an advocate, and I like the courtroom as a judge, and I
enjoy the give and take and the intellectual effort involved. It is just a life—and that is, of course, the court that has the
most interesting cases and issues, and I think it would be an intellectual feast just to be there and to read the briefs and discuss
things with counsel and discuss things with my colleagues. That is
the first answer. The second answer is, I would like to leave a reputation as a
judge who understood constitutional governance and contributed
his bit to maintaining it in the ways I have described before this
committee. Our constitutional structure is the most important
thing this nation has and I would like to help maintain it and to be
remembered for that. Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. Judge, as I understand our agreement from yesterday, the minority has 4 minutes left, but I am not big on holding to minutes.
What I would like to make sure we understand here is, I assume—
may I ask the Senator from Wyoming, does he have any further
statement to make at this hearing. Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, I think in looking at the format
there, there was a minority of 30 minutes, of which I think there is
four, and then Judge Bork was to close, and then Senator Hatch
and I were to divide 10 minutes. The CHAIRMAN. Fine. Okay. Senator SIMPSON. But I probably will not use the entire five. The CHAIRMAN. Sure. Now, are there any more questions for the
Judge?
The CHAIRMAN. Well, Judge, then we would yield to you for
whatever statement you would like to make and then Senators
Simpson and Hatch will each speak for approximately 5 minutes
and then I will have a brief closing statement.
855
Judge BORK. All right, Senator. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, this has been a long,
detailed, and often a profoundly interesting four and a half days of
hearings. And I want to thank you personally Mr. Chairman for
the courtesies you have personally extended to me and to my
family during this week. I also want to thank all the members of the committee for their
patience, their attention, and their general good humor throughout
these proceedings. For that I am most deeply grateful. I have over the past four and a half days been asked a number of
probing, highly complex and thoughtful questions covering a very
broad range of subjects. I have answered those questions truthfully,
openly and to the fullest extent possible without crossing the line
that would place me in a position of speaking to specific matters
that might come before either court. If you have noted, there are views I have testified to here that
reaffirm my acceptance of a body of jurisprudence as established
and no longer judicially assailable, notwithstanding, that has developed in a manner different from a direction I had suggested some
years ago. At the same time, there is much in my earlier writ-
ings—most particularly, my views on the proper role of judges and
the need for faithful adherence to the text and the discernible intentions of the ratifiers of the Constitution and statutes—that I
subscribe to just as fully today as I did before. As a consequence, I have received criticism in some quarters for
being too rigid and criticism in other quarters for being inconsistent or self-contradictory. Neither charge is, in my opinion, an accurate one. As I said to you in my opening statement, I am a jurist
who believes his role is to interpret the law and not to make it. If the members of the committee are looking, as you have said
you are, for predictability, it is certainly predictable that I will
adhere to my judicial philosophy as I have described it in these
hearings and elsewhere. That may lead on occasion to results that
conservatives applaud and on other occasions to results that liberals applaud, but in either event, it will not be because of some personal political agenda of my own. It will not be a desire to set a
social agenda for the nation. It will be because the result, in my
considered judgment, is required by the law. On that point, let me simply add, as I also did in my opening
statement, that when I say "the law," I regard precedent as an important component of the law. As I have described many times
here, there are a number of important precedents that are today so
woven into the fabric of our system that to change or alter them
would be, in my view, unthinkable. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, you have my
record before you. It shows not only a full sensitivity toward minorities and women, but a consistent record favoring the interests
of minorities and women. I have given you my full view of the
equal protection clause. It means what the words say: "All persons
are protected against unreasonable legislative classifications."
You have heard me testify under oath, and I take an oath as a
very serious and affirmative thing. I have affirmed my full acceptance of the Supreme Court's first amendment jurisprudence, including the Brandenburg decision, and I have affirmed by full ac­ceptance of the incorporation doctrine, and there are many other
areas in which that is true. I have tried to be responsive to your questions. I hope I have succeeded. But to the extent any members have further questions, I
will be glad to answer them at a later time. Again, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you and the members of
this committee. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Judge. Gentlemen, which order do you wish to pursue? Senator Simpson? Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, what we have been seeking these past 5 days
from Judge Bork are certain things, certain things for us to determine. Among those are knowledge of the law. In these exchanges
and discussions with the members of this committee on both sides
of the aisle, this man, Mr. Chairman, has demonstrated a most formidable—nay, almost an awesome—knowledge. Surely even your
most severest detractors just have to be impressed. There is no way
that cannot be. Number two, clarity of expression in your explanations of your
decisions, your views, and of the Constitution, and you have explained to us some very complex and difficult concepts. And you
have done that in a way that is so clear that not only those of us in
this room, those members of the committee, but many of our fellow
Americans have received a veritable primer in constitutional law.
And I notice you have that little book in front of you a good deal of
the time. It looks a little well-thumbed to me. You know it. You really do know it, the Constitution. And what
an appropriate time for your appointment when many people in
the United States are reading it for the first time, just because of
this year. And I think that is remarkable, too. Then a willingness and a capacity to work hard, and that is
something that is impressive to me. And another thing, you could
have gone professorial on us at any point in time. You could have
done that, become a bit pedantic and lectury, and you did not do
that. In fact, I do not believe I saw one time when you spoke or
gave an answer over 3 minutes, and then you deferred to the questioner and said, I hope I am not taking your time. I think the only time you ever used the phrase, quote, "On the
other hand," unquote, was in jest or good humor. And let me tell
you, that was interesting to watch for me. So you have had this willingness and you have let us see your
writings and your speeches and your written decisions. You have
shown this tremendous willingness to work—it is an extraordinary
willingness to work diligently, and we have seen this capacity that
you have to be here over these past 5 days while it has probably
worn some of us out.
We are 14 and we had a 4 or 5 hour break between our rounds,
and there you are. And that is extraordinary. And always done
without a shred of impatience or irritation when we all know that
it obviously had to be there. So I think that is impressive to me.
Then judicial temperament—what we always seek here—in the
face of what has been referred to as fierce attacks, ferocious attacks, in the face of dramatic presentations, either in the form of writing or audio, and the reading of things from others. That has
been interesting. And in that you have displayed the very essence
and epitome of patience and courtesy and good humor which in my
book is the definition of judicial temperament. I have seen judges who really fired some lightening bolts from
the bench at me and others in the courtroom. They lost their respect of lawyers in the process. And I am a spirited person myself,
but I always felt of myself as an officer of the court and could
always put aside my personal views. Then, finally, your views and your philosophy. In response after
response we have heard Robert Bork express, explain, discuss his
views and his philosophy. And, again, not in the manner of the
pedant or the lecturer or the professor but as what I see as an
unthreatened man. Under oath, answering questions, often the
same ones, over and over and over again in a very measured and
thoughtful way. I was impressed by that. As I say, I do not think we will ever see it happen again, regardless of what happens here. We will never see this again, because
they will all say, no need to go through that. You do not have to.
You do not have to do that. And so in my mind, Mr. Chairman, such a person as this nominee will not pass this way again and former Chief Justice Burger
was correct. I feel this is one of the finest nominees that we have
had to this Court in 50 years, and it just seems difficult to imagine
why at least a majority of our colleagues in the United States
Senate who will read this transcript and see your responses cannot
help but realize what a remarkable opportunity we have here to
place a very unique and extraordinary man on the United States
Supreme Court. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. The Senator from Utah. Senator HATCH. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am delighted to take these last few minutes. Over the last 5
days we have been judging a judge. Really, during that grueling
time you have answered every question. In my mind you have dispelled every doubt, you have risen above every insult or indignity—and there have been some—you have disposed of every complaint.I think this morning has been particularly interesting because
you have had two very brilliant legal minds asking questions to
yours, among others. But I particularly enjoyed Senator Heflin and
Senator Specter and the erudite way they have asked questions of
you and have expected equally erudite answers. As I said at the outset of this trial, the standard for judgment
has been political, and you have not been judged by your faithfulness to the law but by your critics' fidelity to politics or to a political agenda.
A judge is not a political officer and should not be measured by
political standards and should not have to make campaign promises, and I have been impressed that you haven't made any. You
have said what you believe, you have said what you are going to
do, and I think it has certainly been very, very good.
I think you have forthrightly answered every question, and some
of them four and five times, and you have done it with patience. By
any standard of fairness, however, it seems to me the judgment
would have to be reported in your favor. If this body could rise above political measurements and be half
as fair to you as you have been as a judge to others, then I think
the verdict would be unquestionably rendered in your favor, and I
think it will be in the end. But just look at your record. Take women's rights. They have indicated that maybe you might endanger the equal rights of women,
but what is a fair judgment? The judgment is, and from your statements here and from your record as a judge and as a Solicitor General and your actions, you would grant us much or more protection
as the Supreme Court does, with great fidelity to the words of the
Constitution itself. The Constitution, of course, guarantees any person equal protection of the law, and you have reinforced that. You have proven this
on the bench by your actions, by expanding women's rights under
the Equal Pay Act and other statutes, and we have brought those
cases out. On privacy, they thought maybe you would endanger privacy
rights. Well, your actions speak louder than words. You would enforce all privacy rights in the Constitution and you would strengthen the ability of Congress and the President to enforce any others
that they choose to enact or choose to define. I think this is proven
by your writing the opinion in the Dronenberg case, and I think
that can't help but be considered by our colleagues. With regard to free speech, are you going to only protect political
speech? Well, you have made that clear by your actions. You have
already protected commercial speech in the Williamson Tobacco
case, scientific speech in the McBride case, artistic and expressive
speech in the Quincy Cable case. You know, would you narrow speech protections? What is the
fair judgment on that? Well, you have already expanded speech
protections beyond that of the Supreme Court in the famous
Oilman case that you decided that now the Supreme Court has
adopted.So, really, what about overturning many precedents? You have
made it clear you would not do that. You have been so in tune with
the Supreme Court that in 423 cases that you have voted on, not
one has been reversed. Whether or not they have been listened to by the Supreme
Court, they have rejected certiorari; they have not been appealed
in some instances because the quality of your judging was so good.
That is the point, after all.
Moreover, the Supreme Court has taken every one of your dissents over the majority of your brethren and has adopted them as
their opinions. That is something nobody should ignore. It is really
something.
With regard to Archibald Cox, my gosh, that doesn't even deserve to hear much comment about because you followed through
on Watergate and were primarily responsible for having that come
out to the effective conclusion that it did because that investigation
that you backed up led to a President's resignation and several
prosecutions, as you know, plus you were instrumental in getting Leon Jaworski to do it. And as much as I admire Archibald Cox, there is no question Jaworski really did the job, and where is the compliment for that?
Well, all I can say is you have wiped away any claims that you would sustain poll taxes or literacy tests. You have expanded civil rights in almost every case that you have had before you and you have enforced every civil rights statute that you have faced and several others as well.
On the racially-restrictive covenants, you argued the case that fi­nally created a federal remedy for racially-discriminatory private contracts in the Runyon v. McCrary case.
You could go on and on, and let me just finish with these com­ments, and that is this: A lot of people have said minorities should be afraid of Judge Bork. Well, the fair judgment should be this: Should we fear a judge who strongly enforced voting rights in South Carolina in the Sumter County case?
Should we fear a judge who outlawed sex discrimination in the State Department in the Palmer case? Should we fear a judge who gave equal pay to stewardesses and other women in the Laffeycase? Should w& fear a judge who outlaws discrimination in mili­tary promotions in the Emory case?
Should we fear a judge who protected the due process rights of a homosexual in the Doe case? Should we fear a judge who won pro­tections against private discriminatory contracts and covenants in the Runyon case? Should we fear a judge who went beyond the Su­preme Court in protecting against pregnancy discrimination in the Gilbert case, and should we fear a judge who went beyond the Su­preme Court in promoting free speech rights in the libel cases? Well, I don t think so.
I would conclude with these remarks: You have been very open, you have answered all these questions. I agree with Senator Simp­son; it is never going to happen again. Nobody has been as open, nobody has put themselves forth as much as you have.
When these hearings began, the opposition accused you of being too rigid because they felt judges should be bound by the rule of law as well as those judged. You were too rigid because your mind was closed to new ideas and the rights of minorities, they said.
When they could produce absolutely no good evidence to support either claim, we began to hear a new allegation that you are too flexible; that you are too open to suggestions from this body.
Indeed, a judge who is bound by the law ought to be open to learn from the lawmakers, but these lawmakers ought to learn one critical lesson from this great jurist, and that is the lesson of fair ness. In fairness, this body should provide no other verdict than that supported by the evidence, and that is the verdict of a mag­nificent performance.
Finally, every person is entitled to his or her own opinion, but no person is entitled to his or her own facts. The so-called facts used against you are totally manufactured by people who have made up their own facts out of the vacuums of their own minds.
To be honest with you, I have really been disturbed by the at­tacks that have come upon you, and it reminds me of a quote by Albert Einstein. He said great spirits have always found violent op­position from mediocrities.
I think you are a great spirit, you are a great judge, you are a great legal mind. You are not only in the mainstream; you have got a lot of companionship there from the other great legal minds that we all admire in this century from the left to the right, and I want to compliment you for the way you have handled yourself and I hope our colleagues will read this record and pay strict atten­tion to it, and I have no doubt that you will be confirmed if they will.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator.
Judge, I won't trespass on your time very long. Let me begin by thanking your wife and your daughter and your two sons. I hope that you and your family have not felt you have been confronted by, to use Senator Hatch's words, opposing prosecutors.
But nonetheless, I am sure that, no matter how fairly or unfairly you feel the hearing was conducted or my colleagues may charac­terize it that, it is nonetheless difficult for your family to sit there under those lights for so long.
I have found in my limited experience of holding public office for 17 years that it is a lot harder on one's family than it is on the principal when a member of the family is undergoing any test.
You have been undergoing a test, but that is part of the process, as you well know, Judge. No judge, no nominee is entitled to the spot, nor have you ever implied you thought you were, merely be­cause you have been nominated.
It is as much a responsibility of the nominee to prove why he or she should be on the Court. It is not a presumption automatically made any more than it is a presumption when one of us stands for election that we should be elected. That is the process.
As I said at the outset of this, I viewed my role as Chairman of this committee as not to persuade, not to attempt to persuade my colleagues, and obviously colleagues on both sides have attempted to persuade. You have heard two very persuasive closing argu­ments as to why you should be on the bench.
My function, as I have viewed it, is not to persuade, but to be part of assuring that all the issues were laid out; that you had a full and fair and thorough opportunity to respond, and to initiate any point that you wished to make.
T hope you feel that has been done.
Judge BORK. I do.
The CHAIRMAN. I do not feel this is—I have been around here a long time; I think—in fact, I know longer than anybody here except for Senator Kennedy and Senator Byrd. I have sat through a lot of these hearings.
I have difficulty characterizing any one of the questions, no matter how tough they were, as particularly harsh attacks. And, Judge, I hope you feel—I'm not asking you to respond in any way, but I hope you feel this has not been all about "politics" or only about politics, as some of my colleagues have suggested. I am sure they believe that; I'm not in any way suggesting they don't.
I hope you believe and understand that at least for some of us, and I think all of us, it is also about principle. And I hope that you don't feel that this committee has focused in any way on your background, your private life.
As you know and I am sure you are aware, I have done every­thing, and my colleagues have all agreed, to protect any inquiry into that area. There is nothing there. I have read your FBI report, I have read all those background checks. I think you are an honor­able man.
But if you have noticed, no one has asked you about anything in there.
Judge BORK. I noticed.
The CHAIRMAN. And they could have; they have done it before to other people. If this were going to be pure politics, I think it would have been a little bit different, but it is not, because you are an honorable and decent man. There is nothing in your background that I have seen that in any way indicates that you are not, in terms of your character, fit to serve on any court in any position in this country.
So I hope that when all the dust settles, when you are either on the court—well, you will be on the court, on the circuit court or the Supreme Court—you will look back on this process and at least find some solace in the fact that none of that has occurred, nor will it as long as I am chairman of this committee.
The second point I would like to make to you is that I think it is fair to say that those of us who have taken issue with your philoso­phy, your judging philosophy, to use your phrase, have not, as was predicted, been single-issue people.
When you were nominated, this was allegedly supposed to be a great debate between pro-life and pro-choice, a great debate on all the other issues that the interest groups are out there talking about.
But the fact of the matter is, I think it is fair to say, that my colleagues on both sides of the aisle have not—they have asked about all those things, but I think it is hard to suggest that that has been a focus, a single issue.
I think this is about principle, not about whether you are princi­pled—you are principled—but about whether or not your princi­pled view of judging and how you interpret the Constitution is con­sistent with the principles that others of us have regarding that function and responsibility.
You have been very straightforward about how you view that interpretation of the Constitution. You have confused me a couple of
times, and I acknowledge part of that may be because I have not
fully followed you, not because you intentionally meant to confuse
me.
Other times, I think we may have confused you a little bit, but
one thing has come through for me throughout your testimony. I
have been surprised a little bit about your development of your
views on the due process clause. "Surprised" is too strong; I have
been interested.
I have been interested in your fleshing out further than you ever
had before your views on precedent—I think it is fair to say more
than you ever have in public before. I have found them interest-
ing—not provocative, but interesting—and I have to let it sink through my mind as to how I determine how consistent they are with what has been said before and what you say now.
Again, it is fully possible that they are totally consistent. I have not all sifted through all of it yet. I thought you were going to go some ways you did not go, and you went other ways I did not think, which again is what these hearings were about from the outset.
But a rock-bottom principle, I think it is fair to say, remains with you, and that is on choices of fundamental principle, decisions cannot be made by the court where constitutional material does not clearly specify the value to be preferred; judges can't go off and do that. There is no principled way to prefer any claimed human value over any other unless you find it in the text or the history of the Constitution, as I understand you.
You have written, and I think it is consistent with what you have said, that the truth is what the majority thinks it is at any given moment, precisely because the majority is permitted to govern and to redefine its values constantly consistent with the Constitution.
Now, I believe—I want to choose my adjectives properly here so I don't in any way in this closing statement misrepresent by implica­tion anything you have said. Just let me say what I think.
I think the Constitution is more expansive than I think you read it, and I think judges have more latitude and should have more latitude than you think they should. I believe that the Constitu­tion—well, from the Magna Carta to the Constitution, 800 years of English jurisprudential history, 900 years, have produced an abid­ing, consistent notion that I am who I am because I am, not be­cause an}' constitution tells me.
When we delegated rights to a government, we expressly said that the ones set out as protecting in the Bill of Rights doesn't count them all. That ninth amendment, to me, is, and should be, expansive. I acknowledge it hasn't been used that way, but I think it should be.
I think it is necessary for an emerging society that is going to be faced with conflicts that are going to exceed those which we found, in my view, social conflicts, at any time in our history in the next 20 years.
As I said, I believe we are just born with certain rights as a child of God having nothing to do with whether or not the State or the Constitution acknowledges I have those rights; that they are given to me and you and each of our fellow citizens by a creator and it represents the essence of our human dignity, and even if the Con­stitution attempted to move them, I would still have them.
I agree with Justice Harlan, as we all have quoted Harlan. You have quoted him in agreeing with him; everyone here has quoted him. I agree with Justice Harlan—as we have all pointed out, one of the most distinguished conservative Justices of our era—who stated that the Constitution is a "living thing."
And I acknowledge you believe it is a living thing as it relates to whether you can find a textual basis for the principle in the first place, and you cite often, and I think forthrightly and which sepa­rates you from some other originalist folks, the fourth amendment.
You say, look, if it weren't a living thing, you wouldn't be able to
outlaw wire taps. Obviously, they didn't think of wire taps back
when they were talking about search and seizure. You expand it, but you must find it in the text first.
And I think the Constitution and its protections are enshrined in majestic phrases like "equal protection under the law" and "due
process," and thus cannot be, as Harlan said, "reduced to any for­mula."
It is, as Chief Justice John Marshall said, and I quote, "The Con­stitution is intended to endure for ages to come, and consequently
to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs. Only its great outlines are marked."
In the end, Judge, whatever my reaction or anyone else's reac­tion to your testimony here, which has been long, I think it is fair
to say we have tried to move it as fast as we could, but it has none­theless been long and, I think, thorough.
And I agree with my colleagues; you have done your best to answer. You have not attempted to step back and say, "I can't
speak to that issue." And I hope the confirmation process has been
served well, and I hope that in our debate, our discussions—and
the debate will take place on the floor of the United States Senate
because it is my intention for your nomination to get to the floor of the United States Senate.
I hope that what we have done a little bit of, although none of us is trained as you have been, to the extent you have been in the
law—I hope our discussions have demonstrated to our fellow citizens the majesty of the Constitution. I hope they have demonstrated the greatness that we think the American people require of those who interpret the Constitution.
Let me conclude, Judge, by saying that I do not find you to be racist or insensitive.
I find you to be a very bright man who has done his best to let us
know what he thinks in a complicated set of principles and areas
that we have discussed, and who has a view of constitutional inter­pretation and judging that is different than mine.
And there are some things I have to go back and look at now, and that is to what degree, to how much of a degree, that exists,
and I will do that. And we will listen to testimony from others over the next couple weeks.
It is still my intention, Judge, to move this along as rapidly and as fast as possible, but I can't guarantee you when we will finish.
We are shooting to finish this hearing so we can vote on October
1st, but I think it is fair to say we may not be able to make that,
although that is our intention, based on when and to what degree witnesses are available.
But, Judge, we are going to keep the record open for my col­leagues who may wish to ask you questions in writing, as you have
agreed to earlier, but we will not burden you with many, I hope. At
least my effort will be to see that that doesn't happen, and there
will be plenty of time before this hearing is over for you to answer
them.
So, Judge, I say to my colleagues I want to thank them, and I
want to thank you. Senator Hatch, you are not going to get the last
word now. I am the Chairman, I just want you to know.
Senator HATCH. I don't want the last word. The CHAIRMAN. We have never been in a circumstance where
Senator Hatch has not had the last word. Senator HATCH. Oh, that's not true. The CHAIRMAN. SO I want to make sure that he understands one
of the few prerogatives of a chairman is to have the last word. Senator HATCH. Can I ask a question, Mr. Chairman? The CHAIRMAN. YOU can ask a question. I thought you were
about to make a speech. Senator HATCH. The last thing I want is the last word today. Mr. Chairman, Senator Thurmond asked me to request if we can
get the witness list all the way through. The CHAIRMAN. Yes, you will get the witness list. Senator HATCH. We have given you ours, and we would like to
have it today so we know
The CHAIRMAN. I will try to do that, and I will also point out one other thing. Senator Thurmond has been here a lot longer than I have.
Senator HATCH. A lot longer than any of us.
The CHAIRMAN. Duke just handed me a note. He said, don't forget Senator Thurmond came to the Senate when you were eleven years old. 
He is absolutely correct. Judge, I hope you haven't found it much more than physically tiring. I hope you believe you have been treated fairly. We have tried our best to do that.
I have enjoyed you. I appreciate your cooperation, and to the great relief of your family and to you—you will be able to catch at least the second quarter of the Boston College game—this hearing is recessed until Monday.
