Judge CARSWELL. I do. The CHAIRMAN. Judge, you have a biography there. Is it correct ? If so, it will be placed in the record. 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, Senator, there is one small error in date. My present memory is that my military service should read 8-9-42 instead of 8-27-42, because I entered on active duty with the Navy in South Bend, Ind., Notre Dame University, on August 9, 1942. 
The CHAIRMAN. With those changes, it will be admitted. 
Senator HRUSKA. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask permission to make a few observations and ask a few questions at this time. There is a bill on the floor of which I am manager on our side and the Senate is in session. If I could be accorded that privilege, I would be very grateful. 
The CHAIRMAN. Yes, I will yield to you. 
Senator HRUSKA. Mr. Chairman, by way of introductory 
Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, would the Senator yield for just a brief inquiry prior to the time of questioning, on that very point you have raised; that is, the pending floor situation ? As I understand, Mr. Chairman, there is an amendment that is pending by the distinguished Senator from Michigan to an amendment of the distinguished Sena­tor from North Carolina on a piece of legislation in which this com­mittee has prime interest and responsibility. We went in at 10:30. There was no objection, with the understanding, at least as I under­stand, that the distinguished Senator from Louisiana was going to talk until noontime, and then we would begin the debate on the bill. I would like to know 
Senator SCOTT. If the Senator will yield on that, there will also be a 30-minute morning hour, which carries us until 12:30. 
Senator KENNEDY. If we could find out what is the intention of the chairman in terms of proceedings. I would imagine that after the distinguished Senator from Nebraska makes introductories, would think probably the Senator from Michigan and the Senator from North Carolina and the Senator from Connecticut are in­terested in proceeding. I would like to find out what we are going to do and the way we are going to proceed. 
The CHAIRMAN. We will see the condition on the floor after the vote. I would like to have an afternoon session. Senator KENNEDY. YOU mean we are going to continue to sit through the The CHAIRMAN. NO, the vote is at 1 o'clock. I thought we would quit at 12:30 and come back at 2:30 unless we are going to have votes 
on the floor. If we are going to have votes on the floor, of course, 
we can't do that. 
Senator KENNEDY. AS I understand, then, it is the present intention 
that we will continue to sit until half past 12. 
The CHAIRMAN. That is right. 
Senator HRUSKA. Well, Mr. Chairman, this is the fourth time we 
find the Judiciary Committee considering the qualifications of Judge 
Carswell. In succession, they were first as U.S. attorney, then as U.S. 
district judge, then as U.S. circuit court judge, and today as the 
nominee of the President for an associate justiceship of the U.S. 
Supreme Court. Now, the Nation is entitled to have a man who is 
a man of wide experience and of proper preparation both academically 
and professionally. I do not know that there is any record of any 
present member of the Supreme Court that is as wide and as deep 
as the experience of this nominee in the field of the jurisprudence. He 
has experience on three levels of our judicial system. 
I have been told that there has been a careful consideration and 
study of his record, apart from what was done last June when he 
was considered for the court of appeals, and the conclusion was drawn 
that his record as a judge is a sound one, that he is competent, practical, 
knowledgeable, and fair. 
Now, I would have these three observations to make concerning any 
judge who is before us regarding his rulings and decisions. All are 
equally important. One is that any consideration of his judicial record 
should not be on a selected basis. His record must be examined in 
total and individual cases must not be singled out and held up as repre­sentative. There may very well be other rulings which go exactly 
the other way. So, to get an accurate picture, his record must be con­
sidered in totality. 
Second, any analysis of a judicial ruling must be based on the situation, legal or otherwise, that prevailed at the time the ruling or decision was made. The law is a fast-moving and dynamic field of endeavor. This is certainly true in the field of civil rights. Certainly, what is the law today was not the law in some respects a year ago. It is increasingly true of the state of the law 5 years ago or 10 years ago. 
Finally, the role of the district judge is somewhat limited, inas­much as he is nob a policymaker and he is bound to the decisions and the rulings of the superior courts, more particularly the circuit court and the Supreme Court. He has little flexibility. This fact should certainly be taken into consideration. 
In addition to the survey and study of Judge CarswelFs record as a judge, as a U.S. attorney and as a lawyer, there has been inquiry into his personal, financial, and nonjudicious activity. The President decided he was qualified. I am satisfied this committee will find that this man is fully competent and qualified. 
Now, the records submitted by the judge to the committee include a property statement and his income tax returns. They will show, among other things, that while he is not an impoverished man, he is far from well off. He is far from affluent. And who could be after 17 years of public service with a large family, all of whom are alive and healthy and going to school and trying to get educated? 
I have one final observation, Mr. Chairman. We witnessed not long ago in this room, and also in the Chamber of the Senate, the disposi­tion of the nomination of another nominee. There, too, the issues tran­scended the individual. On that occasion, as well as on this occasion, there was an effort on the part of the President to impart and restore balance to the Supreme Court. Without judging what the Supreme Court has done by way of its decisions these last 15 years, I think everyone will agree that it has been an activist Court. There are some who feel there should be less activism and that the law should be strictly construed. The President has felt that there can be a better balance to the Court. He indicated this last summer. I believe he in­dicates it a^ain in the choice we have before us this morning. 
It is obvious that the country wants balance on the Court. Mr. Dooley was a great political philosopher. Everybody remembers that great quotation of his: "No matter whether the Constitution follows the flag or not, the Supreme Court follows the election returns." Of course, I do not mean this literally. However, what Mr. Dooley said a long, long time ago, has a grain of truth in it. The appointees should reflect the mood of the country. The mood of the country is reflected in election results. The mood of the country demands balance. 
Judge Carswell, there are some questions I should like to ask of you in regard to some press reports that have preceded your appear­ance here today. Senator Gurney has referred to one of them already. That has to do with a speech you made as a candidate for public office 22 years ago, in 1948. You are familiar with the press accounts, I am sure, of those speeches. Would you have any comment in that regard? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, Senator Hruska. Before answering that, how­ever. I would like to make one brief statement. 
Senator HRUSKA. We would be happy to have you make it. 
Judge CARSWELL. Certainly, I had no earthly notion that I would be back before the consideration of this committee when my record was before you some 7 months ago. I am probably the most astonished man in the United States that I am; but I am happy to be here and submit to your examination. 
Specifically in answering your question, when this was first brought to my attention and found upon the records of the little Irwinton Bulletin paper, I really was a little aghast that I had made such a statement. And I mean that utterly sincerely. I had to see it to utterly believe that I had. Someone said that the statement which I had made to the television cameras as quickly as I could do so, and which I repeat here verbatim and stand upon fully, had elements of queasiness in it or evasiveness in it, as if I were suggesting that I might not have made the statement. I think I said something about "attributed" to me. Well, at the time, I did not have the text of the paper before me. I had to see it. I saw it. I make no equivocation about it; I made the statement without a doubt, although I have not independent recollec­1 on of it at the moment. 
I stated then and I state now as fully and completely as I possibly can, that those words themselves are obnoxious and abhorrent to me. J am not a racist. I have no notions, secretive, open, or otherwise, of racial superiority. That is an insulting term in itself and I reject it out of hand. If there be any thought that this be now a matter of con­venience rather than conviction, I can only let you be the judges of this on the basis of my record as a public servant of 17 years, and my pri­vate life as well. 
Senator HRUSKA, Judge Carswell, you were a U.S. district attorney from 1955 until 1958. During that time, do you recall any instance where you could have taken any action or resolved any matters or engaged in any activities that would indicate that you were a racist in the terms and within the scope of the speech which you made back there in 1948 ? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir. 
Senator HRUSKA, Would any such incident occur to you in connection with any rulings of the courts upon which you have served since that, time? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I could not fathom such a thing; no. Senator HRUSKA. The decisions and the rulings, of course, will speak for themselves, and I am sure we will get to those at a later time. 
Now, this morning's paper had some mention that you were a member of a country club down in Tallahassee. I am confident that you read the account. I would be safe in saying all of us did. You are entitled to tell your side of the story and tell us just what the facts are. 
Judge CARSWELL. I read the story very hurriedly this morning, Senator, certainly. I am aware of the genuine importance of the facts of that. 
Perhaps this is it now. I was just going to say I had someone make a phone call to get some dates about this thing. 
This is not it.
I can only speak upon my individual recollection of this matter. 
I was never an officer or director of any country club anywhere. Somewhere about 1956, someone, a friend of mine—I think he was Julian Smith—said, we need to get up some money to do something about repairing the little wooden country club, and they were out trying to get subscriptions for this. If you gave them $100, you would get a share in the stock in the rebuilding of the clubhouse. I did that. Later—I have had this confirmed; I do not have the records with me, but it can be confirmed, without a doubt—I was refunded $75 of that S100 in February of the following year, 1957. We were not even members of the country club. I am not a golfer. It is a golf-playing organization. 
So years later, when my elder son, George, became quite interested in golf, his mother suggested primarily, and I concurred with the thought, that it would be a fine thing for him, a young boy, to play golf. So we rejoined the club on a family basis and were active members of this club—I say active members; dues-paying members. I don't think I went there more than twice a year, but mv son went there frequently and played golf until, I—I am advised and the records show, and I have no reason to question them, that we resigned in 1966 entirely from this club. That concludes the matter. I do not know any more that I could say about this. 
The import of this thing, as I understand it, was that I had some­thing to do with taking the public lands to keep a segregated facility. I have never had any discussion with any human being about the subject of this at all. That is the totality of it, Senators. I know no more about it than that. 
Senator HRUSKA. Judge Carswell, it was sought to make of you a 
director in that country club. Did you ever serve as a director? Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir; nor in any other official capacity. Senator HRUSKA. Did you ever attend any of the directors' meetings ? Judge CARSWELL. Never. Senator HRUSKA. Were you an incorporator of that club as was al­
leged in one of the accounts I read? Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir. Senator HRUSKA. The stock certificate which you got, how was that 
designated, do you remember? 
Judge CARSWELL. I really do not remember, Senator. It was one share of stock. I just really don't have any independent recollection of this, in 1956. "We paid $100 for it and when we saw we were not going to continue to be active because it was primarily a golf club— the only privilege you got otherwise was going there for a meal and frankly, it wasn't commensurate with what we thought was sound policy for us at the time. So we dropped out of the club. That is all there was to it. 
Senator HRUSKA. Have you from time to time used the facilities of the club by way of public meetings or board meetings or anything of that type ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Have I? Senator HRUSKA. Yes. Judge CARSWELL. I have been there, Senator, as guest of other peo­
ple on many occasions, yes, sir, but not for any functions of my own, 
no. Senator HRUSKA. Not for any functions of your own ? Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir. Senator HRUSKA. On occasions when you were a guest, was there any 
indication of segregation within the meetings that you attended? Judge CARSWELL. Well, I didn't attend any meetings, Senator, as 
such. Senator HRUSKA. Well, the social functions ? Judge CARSWELL. There are a number of functions there. Tallahassee is the capital of Florida. It is practically the only facility where one may have a large entertainment function. I have been there on many occasions where the president of the State senate, for example, or the speaker of the house would have a party, or other friends. I have been there many times. There has certainly been no racial dis­crimination among the guests. I have personally attended there several times when there were integrated functions. 
Senator HRUSKA. And were there members of the Negro race present on any of these occasions ? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir, I specifically recall one or two. I don't recall any details. Senator HRUSKA. Has Mrs. Carswell attended any functions or so­cial activities or other activities in the country club ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Of course, I can't speak exactly where she has at­tended on any specific date, but she has been a member of the Leon County, which is the Tallahassee City, Board of Red Cross, which is an integrated board and they have had functions or meetings of some activities of such nature that I really don't know, because I wasn't privy to them, but I know that has occurred at the club. 
Senator HRUSKA. Did you participate in the management of the club or the writing of its bylaws or any of the background concerning the corporation ? 
Judge CARSWELL. None whatsoever. 
Senator HRUSKA. Are you or were you at the time, familiar with the by laws or the articles of incorporation ? Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir. Senator HRUSKA. My safe deposit box has some of those country 
club stock certifications, too. One of them has a very fancy designation on it, "incorporator." I paid my fee. I am sorry to say it was much more than $100, and it was an honorary thing. I could have gone along-just as well without the honor, because I don't play golf either. Could the stock you received on this occasion have borne the label, "incor­porator," indicating that you were one of the contributors to the building fund for the clubhouse ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Perhaps. I have no personal recollection. 
Senator HRUSKA. DO you still have the stock certificate? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, I don't have it at all. 
I don't remember or have any personal recollection of any such thing as a piece of paper saying it was such a stock. 
Senator HRUSKA. Judge Carswell, you filed with the committee a financial statement and copies of your income tax returns. Were those individual returns, or were they joint with Mrs. Carswell? 
Judge CARSWELL. They were joint returns. 
Senator HRUSKA. That is the way you file your income tax returns. It it also the way you reflected your property statement? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. Senator HRUSKA. Would you mind telling the committee so we in 
turn, can inform the Senate, in general what your property holdings consist of, to the best of your recollection, of course ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I don't have that right before me here. I can get it if somebody would give me my briefcase, but I believe I can speak without it, because it is a rather simple story. 
I own three-sixteenths interest in approximately 1,290 acres—this is not 12,000 acres as has been reported somewhere—of unimproved land, which was owned by my grandfather and in turn by my father, who died in 1955. I have one sister who owns a fourth interest in this. Another sister has deeded her portion to her three children. That gives them a 12t^ each in interest in it. And I have deeded one-fourth of my one-fourth—that is, one thirty-second—each to my two sons, George Harrold, Jr., and Scott Carswell. This is located in Wilkinson County, Ga. The best offer we have ever received for it on a firm basis is about $100 an acre on a total, outright sale. It is difficult, however, to put a fair market value upon this property because of one factor: Within that area of the State, there is a vein of kaolin and other bauxitic ores which permeate the hillsides, and surrounding property owners have had a good deal of luck in mining clay. From time to time, my father, and since his death, through my lifetime, we have tried to get people to come in and prospect this thing, hoping it would be worth something. We went through quite a bit of this. Recently, we had one collapse on us, as a matter of fact, December 1,1969. 
Senator HRUSKA. What is the value of this clay and its usage? 
Judge CARSWELL. It is used as a coating, as I understand it, Sen­ator—I don't have the technical knowledge to go into the details of it. 
Senator HRUSKA. Industrial use of some kind ? Judge CARSWELL. Yes. It goes into plastics, some of the microphones here, for example, 
used in the plastics industry. There are many uses and the market 
has gone up. Senator HRUSKA. When did this interest in this land vest in you? Judge CARSWELL. When I became 21 years of age. Senator HRUSKA. If day of the proper kind is located, that would 
make the property pretty valuable, wouldn't it? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. Indeed, we did enter into a prospecting lease arrangement with a 
large corporation in December of 1968, a little over a year ago, and gave them an option to purchase no less than 450—or either 425 acres— at $1,000 an acre. They took that option with the right to so prospect and see for a year whether they wanted to purchase it at that price. Unfortunately we got a report last December 1 that they didn't want the option. They let it expire, so that is completely a dead horse. 
Senator HRUSKA. Judge Cars well, what other holdings have you by way of general description ? 
Judge CARSWELL. My wife and I are tenants in common under the Florida law of our residence. It is mortgaged to the Tallahassee Fed­eral Savings & Loan Association for approximately $50,347.20.1 would think that the current market value of that particular property might be $90,000 today. We have, I would say, an equity of perhaps $35,000 or $40,000 in my home. That is what I am trying to say here. The monthly payments are $469.45. 
I do own, I have in my statement here Senator SCOTT. Before you leave that, the mortgage is secured, is it not? Judge CARSWELL. Oh, yes, the loan from Tallahassee Federal Sav­
ings & Loan is secured by a mortgage on this particular property. Senator SCOTT. Is it further secured by the deposit of collateral ? Judge CARSWELL. Xot any additional other than a personal note on 
the mortgage. Senator SCOTT. I just wanted to know. Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. I have on my statement which was submitted to this committee 
2 acres of unimproved property. I have since been informed that it is six-tenths of an acre. They widened the road or something, and it is not quite that. I have offered it for $2,000 for some time and have had no takers. 
The other items mentioned on the report—I don't know whether they are really in the nature of information the committee is interested in—but I have several life insurance policies. I see no reason to detail those. They are the standard policy. GI policy, the Government in­surance policy running from my service days, one or two other small policies totaling approximately $10,000. 
I have no stocks, I have no bonds whatsoever. 
Senator HRUSKA. During your tenure as U.S. attorney or on the 
bench, have you had any corporate stock ? Judge CARSWELL. Never. Senator HRUSKA. On listed or unlisted corporations ? Judge CARSWELL. Never in my life. Senator HRUSKA. During the same period, have you ever served on 
any board of directors or as an officer of any corporation in which you 
had an investment? Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir. Senator HRUSKA. NOW, mention has been made of some stock in a 
Lox and crate company. Could you tell us something about that? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir, I will. Before I leave this previous line of questioning, I want to make one other statement. You have asked for my holdings and ownerships. I have noted for the committee, and frankly put it before the record—I am not chest-beating about this, but I think it should be full and clear—that I have a loan with the Capital City Bank, a personal loan, that we have there, secured by certain notes of my wife and my own. The amount of that—I don't have that before me here, but it is about $48,000. Those notes are se­cured by my wife's stock. I own none of it. I have submitted an ad­dendum to the report. It wasn't requested, as I understand it, by this committee for me to divulge my wife's financial affairs. She has au­thorized me, however, to disclose before this committee that she does own by inheritance 78 shares of common stock in Elberta Crate & Box Co., which is a small corporation held by her family. She inherited, speaking from memory now, but I think this is accurate, 55 shares following the death of her mother, who died October 13, 1953—I am sure of that. It was subsequently probated and she got her 55 shares thereafter. 
Then her father gave her a few shares until it came up to 78 shares. Those 78 shares, as I understand it, and her divulgence is they have a book value of $954 today. At the time she inherited these things, or was given to her by her father, they had a lower book value of several hundred; I don't know what, but say $600 up to $900. 
The CHAIRMAN. That is a share ? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. Senator HRUSKA. Aside from that, there isn't any other stock that is 
in your joint property statement? Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir. Senator HRUSKA. Or any shares of stock? Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir. Senator HRUSKA. Anything else my way of holdings, aside from 
your household furnishings? I imagine you have an automobile? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir; we hare two teenage sons, each of whom iiis a ear, which is mortgaged and I am responsible for the payments ^n them. I have an automobile which my wife and I share. It is a Pentiac. 
Senator HRUSKA. NOW, in our system of jurisprudence, we have a review of the actions of every court but one. You were on the district court for some 11 years plus. I imagine that some of your decisions were reviewed in the circuit court and perhaps later in the Supreme Court. Do you have any idea of the percentage of your rulings appealed to the circuit court? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I have not, personally, no. I don't know. I haven't attempted to keep a scoresheet on myself. I have decided the cases on an individual basis. Perhaps someone else has done that in the context of this matter here, but I personally have not done so, no. 
Senator HRUSKA. In the district court which you have served and over which you have presided, that was the Western District of Florida, was it 
Judge CARSWELL. Northern District. 
Senator HRUSKA. Geographically, what did it consist of? 
Judge CARSWELL. There are 23 counties. You might think of it as former President Eisenhower always referred to it, as the panhandle part of Florida. He said the part that sticks out under Alabama. Senator HRUSKA. What is the general nature of litigation in that district ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Virtually everything across the board that comes into the Federal court in the way of criminal law and the civil law— contract cases, antitrust cases. We have had a whole range of cases. It has a rather heavy criminal docket for an area of that size. I have sentenced, unfortunately. The worse aspect of the district judges' job is sentencing. I have had the unfortunate responsibility of sentencing no less than 2?000, perhaps as high as 3,000, individuals. These in­volve criminal trials ranging across the board, most of them involving young people, most of them involving—not crimes of violence neces­sarily, but all the multiple problems that come up in the Federal criminal law—Dyer Act cases, some narcotics recently. We have not had any until recently, but we have had a good many of those in the last few 3rears. 
Senator HRUSKA. On a comparative basis, is the caseload in that district heavy, light, or moderate ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Well, at the moment, since 1969,1 would say it is an average caseload. On weighted caseload per judge, it would come out about even with the national average. Prior to that time, it was extremely heavy. We had one judge and then we got a second judge authorized by the Congress and he actually entered onto duty 2 years ago. Since that time, the two judges of that district, I would say. have an average weighted caseload factor, according to the Judicial Statis­tics Committee on standards. 
Senator HRUSKA. Some time ago, Judge Carswell, the Senate and the House, with the concurrence of the President, and his signature, passed a law in which we undertook to revising jury selection proce­dures whereby there would be a representation of all segments of the population on the venire. What has been the experience in your former district in connection with the selection of juries ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Shortly before the passage of that legislation, when it became perfectly clear that this was what was going to have to be done to get a more representative cross section of any com­munity in the jury box, on my own initiative, I directed the clerk of the court at Pensacola, Fla., which is our heavier population area m the district, to immediately take affirmative steps to get the jurors selected from the voter registration rolls—not from those actually voting, but from the total of the registration rolls, to be sure we had a fair cross section of jurors. 
Senator HRUSKA. IS that similar to the provision in the legislation? 
Judge CARSWELL. It is almost precisely. We had it in operation for a while before the law became effective. We had to make one or two little modifications in it, but it was already in effect before the law became effective. 
Senator HRUSKA. But the input into that jury wheel located in the courtroom was derived from the same source that is now authorized and directed by the Federal law, is it not? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir, a random selection of jurors from all the total voters on the roll, yes, sir. Senator HRUSKA. And you put this into practice before the enact­ment of the Federal law ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir, and I think it was done in one other district; I know one other district in the South. I am not sure which one. But I discussed it with one of my fellow judges at the time and we immediately put it into effect before this became law. 
Senator HRUSKA. Judge Carswell, we have had before us for con­firmation, consideration, and reporting to the Senate here from time to time nominees who have come from more or less of a specialized area of the law. I recall one who devoted the bulk of his life and professional career to labor law. I recall another who devoted his efforts as a practicing lawyer to the advocacy of the cause of civil rights groups. Somewhere along the line, in the hearing we asked all nominees a question. That question is usually phrased this way *kCan you, in the light of the fact that you have advocated one cause for so long, whether it is the labor law or whether it is civil rights law. can you, Mr. Nominee, if you were sitting on the Supreme Court, view and consider the cases before you in an impartial, unprejudiced, and judicial fashion, and be fair in rendering your decision in ac­cordance with the law and evidence of the case?" In each instance, the answer was "Yes, we believe we can." 
Now, I do not believe that you come from a special category. You have had a very broad experience. Nevertheless, let me ask you that question on my own and direct it to you. Considering your experience and your career as a public official, and particularly as a judge, con­sidering your origin in Georgia, your native State, and Florida, where you have practiced law and engaged in the public career to which you have devoted the last 15 years of your life 
Judge CARSWELL. IT years, Senator. 
Senator HRUSKA. IT years. Can you, if you are sitting on the Su­preme Court, hear cases before you and consider the evidence and consider the law on the briefs and the arguments, and without refer­ence to where these petitioners come from, without reference to their background and the nature of the controversy before you, do you feel that you could render a fair and just decision ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I certainly do, Senator. I have certainly tried to do so in all of my activities on the bench since I have been there, and then before, as U.S. attorney, not rendering judgments but taking the same sense of responsibility to the work. No man should be there unless he can do so. 
On the second part of your question, I have not had a specialty. This court work is across the field, it is across the board. We have vir­tually the same problems in the courts of the South, with a large area of each State being in the district, that you have anywhere else. The same type of problems generally arise: not always. They are con­centrated in some areas, certainly. Cases of a certain variety are con­centrated in a certain area. This has not been the case in the Northern District of Florida, nor is it the case now. It is a rather broad matter. About half the cases are criminal, about half are civil, generally across the board—general, run of the mill cases, which as you know, now covers virtually everything in the books. 
Senator HRUSKA. Thank you very much, Judge Carswell. You have been very helpful. From my personal observations and from a study of the file, you have been very cooperative in giving us the information we have asked for and even more. 
Judge CARSWELL. Thank you, sir. 
Senator HRUSKA. I am sure I am right in assuming that if there is any further request for information about any of your affairs, you will continue to cooperate in a similar fashion, so long as the request is reasonable and is for information that is both material and relevant. 
Judge CARSWELL. I will be very glad to do so. 
Senator HRUSKA. Mr. Chairman, I am very grateful to you for your courtesy and with your permission, I will now withdraw for a while. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator McClellan. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
Judge Carswell, I think I tendered to you yesterday my congrat­ulations upon receiving this nomination. I renew those congratula­tions today. It had never been my pleasure to meet you until yesterday. at which time we did engage in a general conversation. I don't recall that we went into any specific philosophies or any specific questions or interrogation with respect to your qualifications and background. 
I hare listened this morning with a great deal of interest to the recommendations and the support given you by your two Senators and by your Congressman. I also noted with considerable satisfaction the report of the American Bar Association and its endorsement of you. specifically with respect to your qualifications, your competence., ability, and judicious temperament. 
I have also listened to your responses to the interrogation by the dis­tinguished Senator from Nebraska. Based upon the information and record to date, I know of no reason now why I cannot support your confirmation. I hope that in due course, it will be my pleasure to con­gratulate you upon your confirmation. 
I find now that a very strong prima facie case has been made in sup­port of your confirmation. Based upon your replies, the property you and your wife hold together is approximately $100,000. If it should happen that that land should prove to be worth more, and I hope it does, and I also hope that you will then be on the Supreme Court, be­cause I don't think it disqualifies you at all. 
Judge CARSWELL. Thank 3-ou. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Thank you very much. I will withhold any further questions, pending any developments that may occur. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Ervin. 
Senator ERVIN. I hare to confer that recent proceedings in the Ju­diciary Committee and the Senate in respect to nominations to the Supreme Court remind me of an observation I heard a North Carolina lawyer make about 1924. There was a vacancy on the U.S. circuit: court of appeals in my circuit, and some of the bar suggested that Mr. 
Tom Rollins of Asheville would make a fine judge of the circuit court. And my father, with whom I practiced, and Mr. Rollins had a case together at that time. My father said to Mr. Rollins, "Tom, if you are interested in becoming a circuit judge, I will be glad to get the local bar here to endorse you for the appointment' 
Tom Rollins thanked my father, but said "I don't care for you to do that." He added, "I had a friend down in Alabama that was foolish enough to allow his friends to recommend him for appointment as a Federal judge. The President intimated he was going to appoint him. The next day this lawyer disappeared, and he has never been heard of since. The only clue the}r unearthed for his disappearance was the fact that just before he disappeared, he received a telegram saying, 'all is discovered, flee at once'." 
That would be the course of action I would be tempted to follow if the President should be so foolish as to nominate me for a Federal judgeship. 
I would like to say that the Senator from Nebraska used the quota­tion from Mr. Dooley facetiously, but I would like to expressly disavow myself as a disciple of Mr. Dooley. I don't think judges should follow election returns. I think that the duty of a Supreme Court Justice was stated by Chief Justice Marshall in the most lucid fashion in his opinion in the famous case of Marbury v. Mad'/son. where he pointed out that the Constitution obligates a Supreme Court Justice to take an oath to support the Constitution, and declared that the obligation which that oath posed upon a Supreme Court Justice is to accept trie Constitution as the rule for his official actions. 
My only question to you is, if you are confirmed as a Supreme Court Justice, will you carry out what Chief Justice Marshall said is the duty of the Supreme Court Justice and accept the Constitution of the United States as the rule for your official conduct ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I think that would almost inevitably have to be answered and I do so answer it with the word "Yes." 
Senator ERVIN. Thank you. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Dodd? 
Senator DODD. Mr. Chairman, I have no questions. 
The nomination looks good to me. I expect and hope that I can vote for it. Like Senator McClellan, I have not heard everything, and I will wait until everything has been heard. But I hope to vote for it. 
The CHAIRMAN-. Senator Hart. 
Senator HART. I, too, join in congratulating you on your nomination, but Judge CARSWELL. Thank you. Senator. Senator HART. TO ease the tension, if possible, we are not to under­
stand by reason of the fact that you own no stocks or bonds that you are opposed to the basic concept of a free competitive society? [Laughter.]
Judge CARSWELL. Certainly not. 
Senator HART. The President who has nominated you made very clear his notion as to what he would seek in men. and I hope women, who are sent to the Court. As I recall it, both in the campaign and since then, he has said there would be two factors—I am not sure I have them in order, but I will suggest that on one of them it would not be fair for me to ask your judgment on it at all. He said that he wanted a strict constructionist and lie wanted an eminent figure. Of course, it would not be appropriate for me to ask you how you measure your eminence. But it is fair to ask you, what do you understand the President means when he said he is looking for and thinks he has found in you a strict constructionist ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I cannot and do not propose to speak for what the President has in mind. If you are asking me what I conceive the term "strict constructionist" to mean, I am not surprised, Senator Hart, that you would ask this question, and I would confess that I have given it some thought. I don't have for you a pat answer, because I don't think it is pat answerable. 
We are dealing here with a complex matter. If one is to be polarized as a loose constructionist at one point and a strict constructionist at another, and then to take yourself as a judge of 12 years on the record and say where you fall in the peg or the spectrum of that, it would be very difficult for me to do. Others are far better qualified to make that analysis on the basis of my public record. 
If we are speaking in terms here, for example, of strict construc­tionist as those who believe in reading the Constitution and statutes by the book, as the expression is, by the black letter of the law, in the most limited and rigid, confining interpretation, that is one thing. There is inevitably, as former Justice, deceased Justice Cardozo noted in a tract on this tiling—I reread it recently—"The Nature of the Judicial Process." He went into this very thing very thoroughly, in a very scholarly work. I will not attempt to spread all that upon the record, but he pointed out that no matter what one's views are about the responsibility of administering laws under justice as judge, there is a grain, almost inevitably, of law-making power in the judge. To be intellectually honest about it, this is inescapable. 
On the other hand, and I say again if we are speaking in terms of other things, if what we are talking about is the separation of powers as delineated under the Constitution, I think with great confidence and clarity we can only go back to such source materials as the Con­stitution itself and the Federalist Papers. Particularly to No. 47 by James Madison, where he has done a very fine thing to make clear the intention of the Founding Fathers in this very sensitive area of rela­tionships of the three branches of the Government. 
I do not think that having said all this and recognizing an inevitable judge lawmaking power—there needs to be the power—but there is also the sense of duty to act or not to act depending upon the circumstances as they arise. 
I also think, and would not want any Senator here to think that I think otherwise, that the Supreme Court should not be a continuing constitutional convention. 
That is the best answer I can give you. Senator HART. That is a good answer, Judge. It is a very good answer. I think specifically I should thank you for having the knowledge 
that there is an answer. 
Senator BYRD. Would the Senator yield ? 
Did I understand the distinguished judge to say he thought the Supreme Court should be a continuing constitutional convention? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, Senator, the word "not" preceded that. 
Senator BYRD. I thank the Senator for yielding. 
Senator HART. I wanted specifically to thank the judge for includ­ing in his answer the acknowledgement of what I think is inescapable, that there is indeed a thread of lawmaking in the court. 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes. Intellectually, conceptually, Senator Hart, I didn't think anyone could answer otherwise. This is getting into the field of academics in many ways. I don't mean bjr that that it isn't a viable, real thing, and I am aware of the sensitive nature of the matter to which you address yourself. I think we could write treatises on this. I will just have to stand by my previous statement on the matter. It is there, coupled with the final statement that I made, that I have just made, and that Senator Byrd has so kindly clarified in case there w^as any doubt. 
Senator HART. The only other thing in this preliminary stage of our committee consideration that I would like you—or perhaps I will not even wind up by asking you to clarify your comment on it. I should address myself to it, I guess. 
Is there in the record the 1948 newspaper statement, reference to which was made by Senator Hruska? Judge CARSWELL. I assume you are addressing Senator Eastland, the chairman. I don't know what is in the record, Senator. Senator HART. Mr. Chairman, the Senator from Nebraska raised with the nominee a statement that he had made in 1948 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes. 
Senator HART. I would think in fairness to all that that statement should be made a part of the record. The CHAIRMAN. Sure.
Judge CARSWELL. Senator Hart, I repeat with all the conviction that I have, as I did incidentally when this was brought to my atten­tion, that these views are obnoxious and abhorrent to me. I do not harbor any racial supremacy notions. These are insulting notions to anyone of any race, any notion of superiority in either direction. I do not. I reject them out of hand, as I have done before. This is a matter, I realize, of conviction. 
Senator HART. Well, Judge, are you saying that at the time yon made the statement you didn't believe it or that you have changed your opinion? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator Hart, I can only answer this way: 1 made the statement in 1948. I make my statement today to this com­mittee as I made it immediately to the Nation when it first came up and was called to my attention. It came to me like something out of the disembodied past, almost, I am utterly sincere in my statement to you here today, sir. I am not weaseling with you on it at all, because I don't know any way that I can put it more emphatically than I have. If I did, I would do so. 
Senator HART. Maybe you could make it clearer, though, as to whether you believed it then and changed or never believed it. 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I said it. I suppose I believed it at the time. But trying to reach back into the recesses of one's mind and say what motivated you to do anything 22 years ago on that subject or anything else would be an exercise in psychology and psychiatry that I don't believe I am qualified to answer or explore. 
Senator HART. Well, if you probably, as you say now, believed it then, bringing it up more recently, what events would have caused you now to disbelieve it ? 
Judge CARSWELL. The course of 22 years of history. There have been vast changes, not only in my thinking, but in the country and in the South particularly. There is a good deal more that needs to be done. Perhaps there has also been a vast change elsewhere. This is quite a different day from 1948. This was 6 years prior to the Supreme Court itself holding in Brown v. Topeka. 
Senator HART. I think all of us understand that we are, each of us, a chapter of history and the accident of geography. We are all affected by what was, whether we lived or happened to be born later. I under­stand that. But if Senator Ervin were here, he could give us another maxim that bothers me. Nonetheless I forget how he gives it to us. It is one of those North Carolina friends of his that he is always quoting. The story goes this way—part of what we are is what we were and part of what we shall be is what we are—something like that. It is really the resolution of this problem. I think some of us on the com­mittee will have to compel ourselves to reach on that one. You have been a very fluent—I don't mean that in a glib sense—your ability to express yourself has impressed all of us. 
Judge CARSWELL. Thank you, Senator Hart. 
Senator HART. I have no further questions at this time, Senator. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Kennedy. 
Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, Judge Carswell. Let me also join my colleagues in expressing a word of welcome to you before this committee this morning. 
One of the questions which I am very much interested in, and to the extent that you feel you can make any comment, it would certainly help me, is your view of some of the pressing questions and problems that we are facing as a people in this Nation. I feel that the Supreme Court has played an extremely important and significant role in the extremely delicate balance which exists between the various branches of the Government. It has been a positive role, a constructive role, and I think many of us feel that there will be tremendously important questions which affect the basic rights and liberties and equalities of our citizens over a period of the next several years. Without in any way trying to ask you to prejudge any question or attempt to make any kind of decision, I would be interested, to the extent that you feel comfortable, in hearing from you what you consider to be perhaps the four or five most pressing questions and issues which are before the country today. 
Judge CARSWELL. That is a very difficult question, Senator. My experience, of course, has been that of a professional man in the law, as a judge primarily. I have not been in the forum or the fulcrum of the events of the day. I would certainly think that any man who wa« to have any exercise of power in the Supreme Court of the United States should certainly be aware of the great problems that face our country. If the past is history and the present is prologue, to that extent, certainly one must know that we have great issues in this country and many problems, as I would safely characterize them here, but I don't think it is appropriate for me to be speaking on issues per se. These would be matters more properly within the Congress in the United States to hammer out in legislation. 
Senator KENNEDY. That is certainly true, but I would like to hear what you have to say in terms of identifying the problems, not so much in terms of trying to reach any determination of the solution to these problems. Once again, I press at this point, because I think that regardless of your views on these questions—and they might fall into what might be considered a conservative or liberal kind of position on it—what I would be interested in is to see if there is a recognition of these kinds of problems. 
Judge CARSWELL. Oh, yes, Senator. Senator KENNEDY. Again I am interested to see if you could, at least attempt to identify some of these areas. 
Judge CARSWELL. Well, certainly I would not here and now draw up my own private list of priorities of how to run the Nation. I don't think I am here in that capacity. That is executive or legislative. I don't mind commenting, though, and I can't see any possible difficulty that could be created for one on the Supreme Court, if I am so hon­ored, to state that I am aware of the fact that we have poverty in this country, that we have great problems with dope, we have great prob­lems with the criminal situation. I think it is front page news every day. These are serious problems. I am thoroughly aware of them. 
I am aware of the frustrations of many young people. I don't under­stand them sometimes, and sometimes, I do. I have four of my own. They run the gamut and there are some that may be less fortunate than those. 
Yes, Senator, I think anybody on the Supreme Court should have empathy with these problems or at least be aware of them. He would be in some secluded monastery if he were not. He should know what is going on in the world around him. But this should not, in my judg­ment, impair or infest itself with his responsibilities as a member of the Supreme Court of the United States in his primary function of interpreting the Constitution of the United States and the laws in individual cases and controversies that come before the Court. That is about the best I can do. 
Senator KENNEDY. AS you mentioned, many of the young people— and I realize these are obviously personal responses and opinions— are disillusioned and they are discouraged in many instances. Just once again, from your own personal experience, do you understand this phenomenon and do you see the reasons for such frustrations among young people today ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Some yes and some no, quite frankly. I can un­derstand some of the frustrations of some of them and others, I just don't understand at all, to be honest with you. To the extent they are saying whether they are frustrations or explanations of their behavior, we have many problems in this country, certainly. We have also problems of education, problems of job training, problems of em­ployment. These are vast problems, tremendous problems. Again, my statement to you of recognition of these problems in no way, I think, and certainly I don't want it to be so interpreted, that this has gotten into any area of affecting the judicial process. This is the grist mill from which cases arise. This is perhaps the oven where the bread is first cooked. I think, and I believe I understand your concern about this, as they come out: do you realize where they came from and why they came from there? This sort of thing. I think I can answer your question that I do have an understanding, I think, of these issues in the country. We have these problems in the South just as you have them in Massachusetts and Michigan and many areas; per­haps in some instances, with a great deal more intensity. 
Senator KENNEDY. Could I ask you, directing your attention to the biography that you have, you mention that you went to Mercer University Law School at Macon, Ga., from i946 to 1948. I have seen reports during that period of time that you worked for a news­paper and you also formed a telephone company. Could you give us any information on this ? 
judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. 
Actually, I worked with the Macon Telegraph for 2 months. When I took off my uniform, it was in Jacksonville, Fla., on November 28, 1945. I went home and got my civilian clothes and started to go to law school, which didn't open until January. I worked a brief interval, perhaps 2 months—December 1945 and January 1946, covering the courthouse beat for Macon, Ga., for the Macon Telegraph. I think I got one byline. That is my total claim to fame from that job. 
Incidentally, I nearly got the school superintendent fired for some­thing I reported about his saying, which he said. But that was all there was to that. That was my total employment there. 
In 1946, the little county, Wilkinson County, 20 miles, approxi­mately, 30 miles, east of Macon where the law school is located—my wife and I lived in Macon and I went back to Wilkinson County to see if we could get a telephone business established. All they had in the little county in those days following World War II was the old magneto type telephone at the corner where you crank the thing to make it ring. I thought we needed a telephone business. So I went over and got with the communities there and asked them to let me have a franchise to bring the telephone business into each of these little communities. One was 1,200 people here. 600 or 700 there, 400 here. So we organized the Wilkinson County—I say we did. I did. An aunt of mine had some $2,000 interest in it and I borrowed, I think $7,000, to get up the thing and both the existing exchange, Lord precinct and Gordon. 
I handled that part of it after I was admitted to practice. That was about the only thing I did in the way of practice. I got the franchise, got the rates established. 
After my now famous defeat for the legislature in 1948 and as a liberal candidate, by the way, I then moved to Florida, sold the tele­phone business, and have had nothing much whatever to do with it since. 
Senator KENNEDY. Did you receive some compensation for work­ing for the newspaper and the telephone company ? Judge CARSWELL. My gasoline expenses and a small salary, as I recall. I don't know what it was. A very nominal amount. 
Senator KENNEDY. In terms of your biography, from 1949 to 1951, you had a relationship with the Collins, Truett & Ansley law firm in Tallahassee, Fla., is that right? 
Judge Carswell. That is correct. I was an associate with that law firm during that period of time. We moved to Tallahassee New Year's Day or something like that, 1949. 
Senator KENNEDY. In your previous biography of 1958, it lists you in that biography as being a law partner. Judge CARSWELL. A law partner of whom ? 
Senator KENNEDY. Of Ausley, Collins & Truett. 
Judge CARSWELL. That is erroneous if it were so listed. I was an associate of the firm on a salaried basis. I was a law partner—when I left the firm, we organized our own firm with two others, John Cotten and Douglas Shivers. The three of us had a firm of Carswell, Cotten & Shivers from 1951,1 think it was, until I was appointed U.S. attorney by President Eisenhower in July of 1953. 
Senator KENNEDY. AS to the biography which is part of the record in 1958, the chairman had asked whether it was accurate and you re­sponded that it was completely accurate; yet it had "law partner." Do you want to say for the benefit of this record that that should have read "associate" ? 
Judge CARSWELL. The one that I have before me does read "associ­ate,'' Senator. The one from which I was speaking. 
Senator KENNEDY. That is the 1958 biography I am reading from. 
Judge CARSWELL. Oh, you mean the one when I was before the Sen­ate in 1958 ? Senator KENNEDY. That is correct. Judge CARSWELL. If it states partner, that is just wrong, because I 
was never anything but an associate, never a partner in that firm. That was just an error. Senator KENNEDY. Then from 1951 to 1955, you were a partner in Carswell, Cotten & Shivers ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, I do note now in that connection—I am glad you called my attention to it—it has been misspelled here. It has Shrivers and it happens to be Shivers, S-h-i-v-e-r-s. 
Senator KENNEDY. I imagine during that period of time when you were both associate in the one law firm and a partner in the other, that there were some clients that used both law firms, were there not ? Or were they entirely different clients that those law firms had? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, we had clients, Senator. 
Senator KENNEDY. Later on, after you were appointed to the bench and during the time that you served on the Federal bench, were there any decisions that you made involving any of those clients that you know of? 
Judge CARSWELL. Offhand, no, but it would almost be inevitable that they did, having been there for 11 years and the only judge in about 250 miles, with the total responsibility. It is quite a different thing, of course, from where you have a number of judges in one building. There is no question but what that must be true, and I would say so in a num­ber of instances. Who they would be, I would not now recall. Certainly, I never had anyone who I had any interest in practicing before me at all. 
Senator KENNEDY. Well, I was wondering if you could perhaps sub­mit to the committee a list of those decisions that you made involving any of the clients that you had during your period of private practice. 
Judge CARSWELL. I want to be quite sure I understand, Senator, what you are talking about. 
Senator KENNEDY. What we are trying to get at is whether you presided over any cases in which there were involved law clients that you had previously served. 
Judge CARSWELL. I am certain that there would be a number of them. But offhand, I couldn't possibly say who they would be. If so, and if there were any significant or substantial matter about it, and I tried the case in any capacity, it was a matter that was made public and was fully known to all counsel. I don't think I ever had a case in Talla­hassee, Fla., where the lawyers didn't know everybody on the other side of the case and knew fully who I was and who my associations were and where I banked and everything about me. 
There has never been any suggestions made to me by anyone that I ever sat on a case of any ex-client or anyone or anything else that had any impropriety about it. 
The CHAIRMAN. Well, there was a lapse of 5 years. You were a U.S. attorney for 5 years. 
Judge CARSWELL. That is correct, Senator Eastland. I completely severed by law practice in 1953 and I haven't been in the private prac­tice of law since then. 
Senator KENNEDY. If you could provide for the committee a list of such cases in which you did sit, pointing out each case which involved a former client 
Senator GRIFFIN. Mr. Chairman, I believe that under the circum­stances, that is a ridiculous request to make of this witness. 
Senator KENNEDY. Well, what we really ought to do, to meet our responsibility, having gone through, Senator, in great depth and with substantial impact this whole question with a previous nominee, is to have similar information available to us here. 
Senator GRIFFIN. This looks like a fishing expedition. 
Senator KENNEDY. Well, this is in no way trying to prejudge the question. There have been cases which have been brought to my at­tention as at least needing checking, and rather than raising them at this time before we have checked them, I think it appropriate if we could have them submitted to the committee and then we could check them and talk about it if necessary. As I understand it, in 202 Federal Supplement there appears the case of Bonnanno v. Seaboard Airline Railroad Co. I understand the Seaboard Airline Railroad Co. was a client of the firm that you were associated with. 
What I would like to do is, rather than getting into the list of cases 
The CHAIRMAN. Let him answer. 
Senator KENNEDY. Could I just 
The CHAIRMAN. Yes, but you have 
Senator KENNEDY. I would like to proceed in a way that is agreeable to the witness. The CHAIRMAN. I know, but you asked him a question about the Seaboard Airline Railroad. Senator KENNEDY. NO, I was explaining to my friend from Michi­gan the purpose of the question. 
I would like to tell the nominee that there have been some cases which have been brought to my attention and perhaps to the atten­tion of others, which involve clients of the law firms in which you served. I would rather not get into the question here, since I start off with the supposition that there was absolutely no reason why there is not a very adequate and reasonable explanation for your action in each case. Your contact might have been incidental. It might have been as an associate not working with the client. There could have been any one of a number of reasons for your decision to sit. What I was asking for previously is a list of those cases in which you did sit and in which there were clients of yours and any explanation that you might give, so that at least we would be able to understand the criteria you applied, and perhaps at a later time, raise any questions; but to give you a full opportunity to explore that yourself rather than raising these ques­tions this morning, in which you wouldn't have an opportunity to pre­pare and would have to make offhand responses. 
Now, I am glad to proceed in anyway which you think will provide you with the fullest degree of fairness on it. That is the reason this line of questioning is being pursued in the way it is. 
Senator GRIFFIN. Would the Senator from Massachusetts yield very briefly in light of my comment
Senator KENNEDY. Yes. 
Senator GRIFFIN. Obviously, if the Senator from Massachusetts has some information or some case that disturbs him, it would be perfectly proper to call it to the attention of the committee. I urge and invite him to do so. 
But it seems to me that without any groundwork and without any basis at all, it is irrelevant to make such a request of the judge. It is not enough that he was a district attorney for some 5 years before he\ went on the court and, subsequently, was the only judge within some 200 miles. Is there some case that was decided that bothers the Senator from Massachusetts ? If there is, let's bring it up. 
Senator KENNEDY. Well, there have been cases which have been brought to my attention. We could examine those at some length now, but I would prefer not to since, as you indicate, I would prefer to check them out first. But I was interested in trying to find out, rather than getting into a detailed kind of public discussion on these cases, just to find out if there are some easy explanations, some rational criteria which the judge applied in such cases. It seems to me that the fairest way to proceed is to let him make a written presentation to us. I have two cases which have been brought to my attention now. I haven't had a chance to see whether there are others as well. There are other things which came into the paper this morning that raise some ques­tions in my mind. 
The point that I am trying to get at is that I think that it would weigh extremely heavily in terms of fairness to the nominee to have him provide for the benefit of this committee the cases in which he did sit which did involve his former clients, and with a very brief explana­tion of the relationship, incidental or otherwise, that he might want to give. At such time, then we can decide whether that ought to be a part of the record or not. It seems to me at that time, we would have a better basis for getting into the kind of detailed questioning which may in fact bear on any possible questions which might arise. 
It was certainly not my intention to try, just out of the blue, to try to raise any degree of suspicion which would be unfair in the treatment of the nominee. I have heard of such cases but I'm not willing to say whether they raise any problem at all. 
So I would hope, Mr. Nominee, that you would be able to give us a review of any of those cases which might have involved any law clients, a brief description of any relationship or any association that you might have had with those cases when you were sitting, or any other comment. It seems to me we would be in a stronger position. 
40-399—7C 
The CHAIRMAN. I think that is a decision that this committee is go­ing to have to make. Senator KENNEDY. I would be glad to bring that up in the committee as well. The CHAIRMAN. HOW long were you the only judge in the northern district of Florida ? Judge CARSWELL. For 10 years, from 1958 until January 18, 1968, when I got a colleague. 
I don't mind saying, Senator Kennedy, at all, that the totality of my private practice was from some time in April, as I recall, 1951, until July 1, 1953. What area of the time you are discussing here would have to be inevitably within that framework, because that was it. 
Now, I became U.S. attorney on that date, July 11, 1953. If I under­stand your question correctly, you are asking for all the clients that my partner, John Cotten and Douglas Shivers, and I had during that pe­riod of time. I certainly could not give you a list of them. I would not want you to think that it would be an exhaustive matter, but I would be happy to respond to any case. It would not in any way bother me to answer your questions about any of them. 
Certainly, I didn't sit as a judge in any capacity with respect to any­body's business who had been an ex-client for a period of time, of about 5 years that lapsed between. In other words, we are talking here about ex-clients of 5 years' lapse between that there could have possibly been any connection between my judicial function and my work as an attorney. 
So I would unhesitatingly tell you now, I don't need to refer or to go back and get a list. We didn't have a great many. Senator KENNEDY. I suppose you could respond to this: When a former client shows up, what are your standards ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir, I will say this: I can distinctly recall one or two cases. Before I address myself to that, Seaboard Railroad has been mentioned. I have never represented myself as a lawyer, as a partner in any firm representing that or any other railroad. I am sorry I didn't, but I didn't. But I did do some work with former Governor Collins, who represented the railroad, and he was a partner in the firm, and I was an associate. He and I tried a number of cases in all parts of Florida together, as attorneys in this regard. Now, Sea­board Railroad, I suppose, has been in Federal court—I don't recall— yes, I recall several cases where they have been in my court. This perhaps was some 8 to 10 years later. I had no connection with Sea­board at all. My salary was not dependent upon the success or fail­ure of my performance with the partners in the firm in that regard. I got not direct benefit out of any fees that Seaboard might have paid to my partner—not my partners, my employers. 
Now, there were clients, of course, that I did represent, a number of them, I suppose. I wish we had had more. But this was a just strug­gling along proposition there in those days. I would have no hesi­tation in telling you, sir, anything about any of that without violat­ing any client relationships. Certainly there is nothing secretive or furtive about my answer. 
The standards you asked me about, and I can recall with specificity one or twro now, for example. Recognizing one as an extremely sensi­tive and hard fought case, the case that Senator Holland has just re­ferred to that he was a witness in, I brought out and called it to the attention of counsel that many years before, a partner of mine had done some title work for one of the litigants in that case. This was called to the attention of every one of the lawyers—there were some 30 lawyers there, including former Attorney General McGranery, who was one of the counsel in that case, former Senator Russell of South Carolina was counsel in that case. It is all spread on the record in that very hard fought litigation that had been pending for some 10 years. To avoid any possible thought of impartiality or my ability to sit on that case—it was a jury case—I divulged this. I don't think there was anything to divulge, but I called their attention to it and nothing was ever objected to about it. As a matter of fact, there was an affirmative response: that it was all right to proceed and it did pro­ceed. That is the standard I would apply to any in that type of decision. 
Senator KENNEDY. This is the point which I think is important, 
the standard which was used in these cases by you in deciding to sit. 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. 
Senator KENNEDY. IS there anything more precise? You have given 
us the factual situation to some extent in that case. I would be just 
interested in sort of a general response. 
Judge CARSWELL. I mean that across the board, Senator. I can't say that in each and every case, where any client or possible association of a client or a relative of a client came into the Federal district court. I have dealt with a multitude of problems and I would recall that I once represented this facet or that facet of their problems. I acted as an attorney upon occasion for the adoption of children. Perhaps later on, they came in and had litigation in court. I thought I had a duty, and I would still say I would have the duty, to try these cases, rather than to bring some other district judge from Jacksonville or Miami or some other area. I have never had this questioned. If it has been, I have disqualified myself, and I have disqualified myself in a number of cases. 
Senator KENNEDY. Earlier today, you responded to the inquiries of the Senator from Nebraska on the golf course down at Capital City Country Club. This was, as I understand it, in regard to a newspaper report that was in this morning's paper, and you responded to him, to the question of the Senator from Nebraska, that you thought it was principally an effort to build a clubhouse. 
Judge CARSWELL. My sole knowledge of that matter had to do with a conversation with a friend named Julian Smith in Tallahassee, who approached me and virtually anyone else, as I recall. He was trying to get the $100 apiece from anyone to build a new country club. I gave him $100. I then received some kind of message that I had a share or stock in this thing. I did receive it, and some several months later, as I have already stated, I sold it and got out of the thing entirely and got $75 back. That is my sole connection with that. I have never had any discussion or never heard anyone discuss anything that this might be an effort to take public lands and turn them into private hands for a discriminatory purpose. I have not been privy to it in any manner whatsoever. 
Senator KENNEDY. By receiving that share, you became either a di­rector or subscriber of that club ? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir; I never became a director, Senator Ken­nedy, at all. I don't know how it appears in the label there, but I never attended a meeting with anybody. I don't think I ever talked to anybody about it but Julian Smith. I don't think there was ever even one other human being with whom I ever had a conversation about it. 
Senator KENNEDY. Did you in fact sign the letter of incorporation? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. I recall that. Senator KENNEDY. What do you recall about that? Judge CARSWELL. That they told me when I gave them $100 that I 
had the privilege of being called an incorporator. They might have put *down some other title, as if you were potentate or something. I don't know what it would have been. I got the one share and that was it. 
I found later, since we were not golfers, neither my wife nor me, that at that point, our four children were preschool age or school age, the club meant very little to us. It meant virtually nothing to us. It was only a privilege of going there to get a meal. So we dropped out very shortly thereafter, although we rejoined after an interval of time when ray boys got up to 14 or so and wanted to play golf. Then we dropped out of that after a while and I haven't been a member since 1966. 
Senator KENNEDY. Did you generally read the nature of your busi­ness or incorporation before you signed the notes of incorporation ? Judge CARSWELL. Certainly I read it, Senator. I am sure I must have. I would read anything before I put my signature on it, I think. 
Senator KENNEDY. DO you remember that it talked about the pur­chasing and leasing and acquiring and operating a golf course and tennis courts and swimming pool, clubhouse, club facilities, lake; main­tain and operate the same; purchase lease, and represent all or any real or permanent property necessary for said purposes, to do all the things incident to and in furtherance of a private country club, for the recreation, health, amusement and pleasure of the members thereof, to operate any business or facility incident to or in pursuit of these ob­jectives? Would this lead you to believe that their only interest was just in the building of a clubhouse ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Oh, no. I certainly was aware that there would be things going on around the clubhouse that normally do. I didn't mean to imply that. If I did, I correct it. 
Senator KENNEDY. YOU weren't, at least in your The CHAIRMAN. Let's recess now until 2:30. 
The CHAIRMAN. Come to order, please. Senator Kennedy is recognized. Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, I want to make just a very brief 
statement. Then I want to return to the floor. I hope I shall have an opportunity at a later time to get into the areas of inquiry which I started this morning. But I wanted to clear up doubts about the exchange that I had with the nominee and with the Senator from Michigan this morning. 
Our job here is to obtain a complete record on the basis of which we can perform our duty to advise and consent. The most serious problem we had during the last confirmation proceeding was the question of standards for a judge's disqualifying himself in certain cases. I would think, for their own protection, Members on both sides of the aisle would want to get this question on the table now to assure themselves in advance that there is no problem in this instance, rather than ignore the issue and take the risk that it will arise later, perhaps when the nomination is on the floor or when the judge has become a Justice. 
Rather than engaging in a public fishing expedition, I thought the best way to approach this was to have the judge give us quietly and with any explanation he wishes a list of cases involving former clients of his law firms on which he sat. Since we do not have access to a list of his clients, or even to a list of his cases, other than reported ones, there is no easy way for us to determine how frequently the judge was faced with the situation. 
I had assumed that the list would mvolv-e only a handful of cases, which would be easy for the nominee's staff to compile from his own records. 
The judge, however, indicated that because of the length of time in­volved and the nature of his practice, and the factor of his being a single judge in the districts, such instances would be numerous. He also indicated that in all such cases, his practice was to inform the parties and, in some cases, he disqualified himself. TTe was not too clear on the criteria by which he made his decision to disqualify himself. I hope he will clear that up. 
As I indicated, we do not have readily accessible means for finding examples of such cases. 1 had not intended to mention the case that was brought to my attention, since I have not had a chance to determine whether it was significant or not. At the prodding of one of the Members, I did make reference to it, and the judge's response demon-states what I was trying to get at. 
The nominee indicated that as a private attorney, he went around the State arguing cases in different courts in behalf of the Seaboard Air Line Railroad. He also indicated that the railroad was a party in many cases argued before him when he went on the bench. 
Those two facts are not necessarily embarrassing or even suggestive of impropriety. The judge may well have informed the party in each case, or he may have had other reasons for considering it proper to sit. All we want to know i = exactly what standards he applied. There is no implication at all of impropriety by my asking that question. 
If submitting a list of cases is too onerous a burden, then certainly a few such examples with explanations would meet our needs, and we shall certainly accommodate the nominee in any way we can. We just want to have his thoughts clear in the record so that if and when, later on, people come to us with allegations, we ran have a basis for placing him in the proper context. This is for the nominee's protection and for our own. 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to pass at the present time and rome 
back. I do not know whether the nominee wanted to make any comment 
on what we discussed this morning, I want to afford him that op­portunity. 
 
Judge CARSWELL. Thank you, Senator Kennedy. 
I have a brief comment I want to make. 
I regret if there has been any confusion about my standards. No. 1, I have tried no cases whatsoever with any form of clients for a period of nearly 5 years—that is to say, I went out of private practice en­tirely and absolutely on July 11, 195-3. 
I didn't try any cases as a judge whatsoever until April 18—really, it was a little later than that; that is when I took the oath of office— 1958, a period of almost 5 years. 
Now, the list of cases that I have participated in as a judge would be extremely lengthy, obviously, spanning 11 years until June of 1969. The number of our clients, on the other hand, when I was in private practice with the firm of Carswell, Cotten, and Shivers, is a rather small list. I can say unequivocally that I think that because of the length of time between those two incidents in my work, there is not a U.S. district judge probably in the country who was so insulated, unless he be U.S. attorney or in some governmental position and entirely removed from private practice, who would have had a similar experience. 
The standards I would use in my case—in any case—if there were any suggestion whatsoever of any impropriety in my sitting, or that I had an interest in the case beyond even what the statute requires, which is substantial interest, I would not sit and I have not so sat. 
I shall be glad to respond fully as to any particular case or any group of cases that may be of interest to the Senator or anyone else on this committee, or that the committee would feel would be appropriate. 
I do want to comment on one thing. You mentioned the Seaboard Railroad, for example. I was not an attorney practicing in a private capacity as a partner in a firm whatsoever with those. I was in associate with the firm of Ausley, Collins & Truett during those years. As such, the outcome of the case meant absolutely nothing to me other than maintaining a standard of professional performance, of course. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bayh? 
Senator BAYIT. Mr. Chairman. Judge Carswell. 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator Bayh. 
Senator BAYH. Inasmuch as in my judgment, the seat which you have been nominated to fill was created by rather unique circum­stances—it is the first time in history that a Justice felt compelled to resign because of ethical questions—I felt and this committee felt, that we should take a closer look at standards. Before the session is over, I hope we will take a closer look of Justices, and of ourselves. 
Relative to your qualifications, sir, my questions break down into a couple of areas as I have heard your testimony and read some of the pros and cons. One would be philosophical, and then, two, I would like to ask some questions about this whole business of ethics. Where do we need to go? Where do you feel we should go? Pertemps what standards you have set for yourself in this question we have spent so much time dealing with in the Haynsworth matter—namely, the ethics standards. 
In the philosophy area, let me say, before I approach this, you and I may have differences in philosophy and that would not compel me to say you are not qualified. I think the President has a great deal of leeway on this. But I did say in the Haynsworth discussion that if a nominee had a philosophy that was so out of step with the mainstream and the direction the country appears to be headed, in that it would present a clear and present danger, then I think philosophy would enter into my thinking. As I say, I hope your philosophy doesn't come into that category. 
If, indeed, I thought you stated today what that statement said in 1948, I think it would fall in that category. I think you said to the Senators whom you paid the courtesy of visiting, and now to the press and the whole country, that this in no way encompasses your views today on the subject. Is that right? 
Judge CARSWELL. That is absolutely correct, Senator. 
Senator BAYH. Could you give us some idea, when you changed your mind, or was that just sort of inserted in the high spot of the campaign, where something had to be said to turn the election around ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I couldn't do it. I, of course, can't pinpoint a moment in my life—I doubt if any of us could really—when we really make a basic conviction about such a matter on anything of that importance. I have been in public life now since July of 1953. I cer­tainly have not got a record that would support any conclusion that I have racist sentiments or that I harbor any notion of racial superiority. I do not. 
I know this in my inner self. I know this as a man and as a human being. 
Now, as far as judgment to be passed upon that statement, it will have to be up to the good sense of this committee. I wouldn't want any member of this committee to vote for me if they thought I secretly har­bored some notions along those lines. I would not expect them to. 
I remember something that Justice Stewart said, when he was in a similar position some years back, he made the remark that I para­phrase, that he wouldn't want any member of the committee to vote for him if he had any notions that he was going on the Court to undo all that had been done or that he was not going on the Court to pass his own honest judgment as to what matters would be there before him in the interpretation of the Constitution with a free and clear mind and conscience. 
I have to submit it to you not as a matter of convenience but as a matter of conviction. 
Senator BAYH. I hope you understand that this matter would not have assumed the prominent place it has if it were not for the impor­tance of that statement. I think you understand we feel duty bound to ask such a question and get your answer on it. 
Judge CARSWELL. I thoroughly understand. 
Senator BAYH. Would you say that all citizens of all races should be given equal rights to enjoy the privileges of public accommodation in public places? I am trying to get some definition here so we can see exactly what we're facing. 
The CHAIRMAN. YOU are asking him a question that he might have to pass on if confirmed. 
Senator BAYH. He certainly may have to pass on it now. 
Judge CARSWELL. Insofar as that general question, you have put it under the general statutes and the Constitution. It is already in the law, and I intend to follow it, and have so done. 
Senator BAYH. I just wanted to hear you say that. I don't want you to deal with any case or any specific set of facts. Judge CARSWELL. Under the present law and the Constitution and the decisions of the Supreme Court, I follow them as a judge. 
Senator BAYH. DO you feel, in regard to education, educational op­portunities, equal housing treatment that the Congress has given, there is nothing about your background or your philosophy that would cause you to want to revoke the present status of the law of the land as it is now ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I would take the facts as they come before me in an individual case and apply the law as reflected in the Constitution and apply them honestly, with my best judgment, without any mental block or anchor or tug on my mind in this area, Senator. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, in Senator Kennedy's questioning, the matter of the golf club, social club, or whatever it was apparently, that had segregated membership, came up. Rather than go over that line of questioning, I would like to get your thoughts, if you please, about whether you feel that this effort, which has been used by a number of areas, to go from a public facility to a private facility to avoid the law which requires them to integrate, whether you believe that this type of practice as a facade to escape what the Supreme Court has said, 1ms any place in our society today ? 
Judge CARSWELL. First of all, I have to say there is nothing I have done about this defunct corporation. I never served to operate as a director at all in any way. The name on the paper says, "director." I never met as a board of directors. It went defunct in 1950. The title to this particular property went into a subsequent corporation for which I was not a director at all. 
It was formed in August 1950, and I was out of it on February 1, according to my present record. 
Senator BAYH. I take you at your word, that which von said to Senator Kennedy and say again. I think most of us realize this has become a common practice, utilized in many places, and a man sitting on that bench has to recognize, it seems to me, that this is a facade some people try to hide behind. 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I did not hide behind any facade. 
Senator BAYH. Not you, sir, but some clubs try to use this means, some public facilities are assumed by private ones in an effort to escape the Inw that pavs to integrate. Does this practice concern you? 
Judge CARSWELL. If you're asking me to pass judgment on a set of facts prematurely. I respectfully submit that I can't answer them. It would be highly improper to answer such a question. There mav be cases just in the category that you describe, probably are. on their way to the Supreme Court of the United States. In all likelihood, there may be some before the court on which I now sit. In this area, without attempting1 to be evasive about it at all, I just simply have to take the position of other nominees, the traditional stance, and, I think, the proper one, that you cannot get into this. I would box myself in in such a manner that I would probably then be disqualified to sit on that case that arose under that situation. 
TITP OH AIRMAN. You bought a share of stock in a country club ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes. sir. 
The OTTAIRMAX. Did that corporation ever operate a country club ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Never operated at all. 
The CHAIRMAN. Never operated at all ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Never operated at all. 
The CHAIRMAN". In fact, it was a corporation organized for profit, wasn't it ? 
Judge CARSWELL. That is my understanding, Senator. It was orga­nized for profit and then, later, a nonprofit corporation was formed, in which I had no part as a director. 
The CHAIRMAN". That was a corporation that operated the country club? Judge CARSWELL. That is the one that got the title to the property that has been the subject matter for discussion. 
The CHAIRMAN". Yes. 
Senator BATH. Mr. Chairman, I'm willing to accept the witness' description of the activity or inactivity of the club, and indeed his nonparticipation. 
But I think it would make it much easier for some of us who would like to vote in support of your nomination to know that in those communities where a calculated effort is made to create, out of a public accommodation—a park, whatever it might be—a private ac­commodation for the sole purpose of avoiding the necessity of integra­tion, that your vote would be cast against this obvious subterfuge. 
Now. this is said with complete leeway to adjust to facts. If you feel you cannot answer this, I will not pursue it further. I am not trying to say what you did was wrong or right that many years ago. What I am trying to determine in my own mind is how we are to vote here. 
Judge CARSWELL. I would just have to repeat what I said and give one further example why. I have not read the paper carefully today in this regard, but I heard something somewhere that an opinion has been rendered by the Supreme Court recently, in the last day or so, that touches into this area. I think it would be highly improper for me to opine anything about that at all. 
I think I'll have to stand on my record and the statement I have given you. 
Senator BAYH. Fine. You have a right to do so. 
Is it too specific to ask you to give your opinion on—I think I would probably get the same answer. 
Let me deal with another area, because you have every right to answer or not answer our question, and wTe don't want to get you in a situation where you box yourself in. 
Some have made the statements that in civil rights cases, you have used every possible method to delay these decisions or to avoid assum­ing Federal jurisdiction over matters which were previously State jurisdiction. 
Would you care to comment on that, or send us an example in advance to rebut this allegation ? 
Judge CARS WELL. Senator, I'll stand on my record in that regard. I have not delayed or attempted to delay rendering judgment in this field or any other field of cases whatsoever. 
I think that that is the only answer that I can give you. 
Senator BAYH. Senator Hart and Senator Kennedy earlier talked about the place of the Court and the vote on the Court in the whole area of social change, what indeed is the responsibility of the Court. Not to repeat those, I noticed that last Thursday, Fred Graham, who used to serve as counsel for one of the subcommittees of this commit­tee, wrote a rather lengthy article in the New York Times in which he had one paragraph that I would like to ask if you feel is an accurate interpretation of your feeling as to the role you would like to assume on the Supreme Court. 
In analyzing your opinions, he felt that these opinions reveal a jurist who hesitates to use judicial power unless the need is clear and demanding, one who finds few controversies that cannot be settled by invoking some well-settled precedent and who rarely finds the need to refer to some social conflicts outside the courtroom that brought this case before him. 
Is that an accurate interpretation ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I think I would be the last one that would be able to render a judgment on my own opinions. They would have to speak for themselves. I think I would have to simply leave that to others to make the analysis. 
Senator BAYH. YOU said earlier today that you didn't think the Supreme Court should be a continuing constitutional convention. Do you believe that as a Federal court judge, a Supreme Court Justice, you nevertheless have to take into consideration the social conflicts to which Mr. Graham referred as repeatedly whirling around us in trying to apply the Constitution and the facts of the situation today ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I don't see how they can escape doing so. That is the grist that grinds the mill there. That is where your cases come from, from controversies arising among the people across the whole spectrum. 
Senator BAYH. It has come to our attention that back in 1958, be­fore I had the good fortune of being on this committee, our distin­guished chairman asked you to take the following oath, and I would like to get your thoughts on this. He said: 
Do you, George Harrow Carswell, in contemplation of the necessity of taking an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, understand that such oath will demand that you support and defend the provisions of Article I, Section 1, of the Constitution that "all legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States which shall consist of a Senate and a House of Representatives," and that, therefore, you will he bound not to participate knowingly in any decision designed to alter the meaning of the Constitution or any law passed by the Congress and adopted under the Constitution? 
Would you want to take such an oath here now, as you are preparing to sfo on the Supreme Court of the United States ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I took that oath before the committee, as the record shows, at the time the subcommittee consisted of the present chairman, Senator Eastland, Senator Dirksen, and Senator O'Mahoney. Shortly prior to that time, there was a bill pending in Congress, either by Senator Jenner or one of your predecessors from your State, and Senator O'Mahoney was also interested in it. 
They wanted to have such an oath administered to all nominees at all levels in the Federal judiciary. 
As it was explained to me by the chairman of this committee prior to that time, this oath was being requested of me. My response to him then and my response to you now would be this. I distinctly remember paraphrasing something that President Eisenhower said when some­body asked him if he would get up and salute the flaw. There was something going on about the flag at the time, as to whether it was appropriate to salute the flag. I stated that I would have no objection taking an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States of America in its parts and in its totality, that in taking an oath as to recognize article I, section 1,1 did so with the full knowledge that the ultimate oathtaking in the office required me, as it did, and as it has twice subsequently, to protect and defend the Constitution in all of its parts. 
Senator BAYH. I salute you for reaffirming your support for what I think would be a normal oath given a judicial officer. But the matter that I thought we ought to lay to rest here, without trying to verify the reality of whether that was a conservative or a liberal effort in 1958—I have heard both sides argued—rather than try to put the record straight right now with you going on the Court, whether you think the last part of that is not a matter of some concern, in which we perhaps ought to redefine what we mean when we say, "not to participate knowingly in any decision designed to alter any laws passed by the Congress?" 
Now, if the Congress of the United States comes up with an un­constitutional law, it seems to me whether you call it altering or ruling it unconstitutional, that is a pretty strict responsibility. Am I in error in suggesting that I 
Judge CARSWELL. IS that your question ? 
Senator BAYII. Yes. 
Judge CARSWELL. NO; I don't think you would be in error in sug­gesting that at all. Senator BAYH. YOU would suggest that perhaps at least part of that oath would not be appropriate right now? 
Judge CARSWELL. Without any doubt, I think that a Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States has an obligation to declare unconstitutional a lawT that he finds to be so under the Constitution. 
Senator BAYH. Thank you. I won't pursue that. 
The CHAIRMAN. I want to give the facts about the oath. 
Senator BAYH. I think all interested parties ought to be heard. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator O'Mahoney and Senator Hennings were opposing the Jenner bill, which was aimed at the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in subversive matters. Now. the record shows that in a committee meeting, Senator O'Mahoney dictated this oath and Senator O'Mahoney—the committee lost a quorum and couldn't vote. Senator O'Mahoney and Senator Hennings and others requested me, as chairman, to ask or to require any nominee to subscribe to that oath. In fact, we had requests from other members of the Judiciary Committee that that be done. And that oath was propounded to every nominee that year. 
I think Judge Carswell was the first. 
I remember that there was an appointment to the judiciary from Alaska and one from Hawaii, and I was instructed by the committee, since these nominees were not coming here for hearing, that the oath be mailed and that they bs required to sign it before the committee would act. 
NOWT, as far as Judge Carswell was concerned, and all other nomi­nees, my judgment is that none of them would have been cleared by the Judiciary Committee unless they had subscribed to that oath. It was Senator O'Malioney's idea and, as I recall, it was supported by Senator Hennings and others. 
Those are the facts about the oath. This gentleman happened to be the first one, and it was requested, it was required of every other nominee that year. I am informed of that by the staff, who have checked. 
Senator BAYH. I appreciate that explanation. I take the chairman's word and am pleased to have the record made complete. The previous public record, which is available to us, shows the oath being addressed to the nominee and Mr. Carswell saying, "I do," and the chairman saying, "Is there anything else,"' and Senator Dirksen saying, "I think that is all," and the chairman saying, "Thank you very much." 
And that was the end of the hearing. So I think it is important. I admit to a legislative prejudice. Maybe that is bad, in front of a prospective Supreme Court Judge, but I would like to think the Con­gress has infinite wisdom. Under our tripartite form of government, that has not always been the case, and I feel that it is important that we not have a judge who is timorous in the responsibility he has to knock down a law which Congress may pass with all good intentions, which is not, indeed, within the province of the Constitution. 
You said you would not have this hesitancy, and that is all I want to set into the record. 
Do you have anything you want to add to this? I do not want to muddy the record, but I wanted to clear that up. I think we have pretty well done it. 
Judge CARSWELL. If you're satisfied with the answer. If not, I can only say again that I would not have any hesitancy, if I felt a law were unconstitutional, to so declare. 
The CHAIRMAN. It would be your duty, would it not? 
Judge CARSWELL. An absolute duty under the Constitution. 
Senator BAYH. That is why I asked the question. There seemed a real inconsistency between that oath—and that has been explained now—and the duties, as I see it, of any judge. 
Now. let me nc-k one Question that 1 mentioned to you yesterday, in passing. I have ^-fill not had the opportunity to look into it as fully as perhaps we should, but I mentioned this matter which has been of some significant concern to various women's rights organizations. I have subsequent!v found out that that case is Phillips v. Martin Mari­etta. 416 Fed. 2d 12;VT. which was a case of last October, in which, as I recall, the issue was whether an employer refusing to hire mothers that had preschool children was a violation of 42 United States Code 703, which made it incumbent upon everyone to treat women equally. 
Xow, in that case, when a petition was made for review by the en­tire panel, as I recall, you voted no, which has given some people the impression that you are not in favor of equal rights for women. 
Would you care to address yourself to that question? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I did not write that opinion of the court. There was a dissent, as I recall. It is improper for me to comment on any of the particulars about the facts of that particular case. I simply cannot do it, with no attempt to be evasive about this at all. I simply cannot answer it, because here, again, we would get into a situation where I simply couldn't decide cases under this particular statute. 
The record shows how the vote went; how each judge on our court voted, I suppose, is recorded. It shows how my vote is recorded on the petition en bane. I do not have immediately the case before me; I was not on that particular panel. You have stated what my vote was and I assume it is stated correctly. I have no reason to question it at all. 
It speaks for itself, the opinion there, and the dissenters speak for themselves. Judges, you know7, disagree among themselves sometimes, and obviously there was some disagreement here within the court it­self. That is another reason why it would be highly improper for me to delve into this area. 
Senator BAYII. Fine. I think you can also see why it would be highly proper for this committee to make certain that we are not putting on the bench a man who, for some reason or other, feels that women should be not treated equally with men. Some people have this feeling with­out dealing with the specifics of a case. 
Inasmuch as a moment ago you dealt with civil rights in somewhat of a black versus white situation, is it also fair to say that you believe the Code of the United States relative to equal rights for women should be enforced? 
Judge CARSWELL. The law of the land should be enforced, yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. 1 just will read one section of the law specifically referred to in the case. It says that it shall be an unlawful employ­ment practice for an employer to fail to hire or to discharge any indi­vidual or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or type of employment because of race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. 
Now, let me, if I may, deal with this question of ethics, because I think it is important that we let the country know that we are search­ing for a higher ethical standard. As I said, I hope we can apply this to judges and apply this to Members of Congress, myself included. 
It is fair to say, is it not, Judge Carswell, that after having heard your recitation of the property that you own, you have not sat on a case in which, you had a direct pecuniary interest ? 
Judge CARSWELL. That is certainly true. 
Senator BATH. YOU have mentioned your wife's interest in this— was it Elberta Crate ? Have you ever sat on any cases involving Elberta Crate? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO. 
Senator BAYH. Or any other pecuniary interests involving your wife? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO. 
Senator BAYH. Have you sat on any cases involving major cus­tomers of Elberta Crate? 
Judge CARSWELL. I didn't even know who the major customers of Elberta Orate are. We have a close family, but they don't tell me all their business. 
Senator BAYIT. In the controversy surrounding the previous nom­inee and one Supreme Court Justice—there has been a great deal of controversy surrounding the issue of standards of ethical conduct for a judge. I would like to explore this area and briefly get your feeling, if you feel you can do this without dealing with the specific factor or matter of a case. 
The general law of the land, as you know, is cited in 28 United States Code 455 which, just to refresh my memory, if not yours, says any justice or judge of the United States shall disqualify himself in any case in which he has a substantial interest, has been of counsel, is or has been a material witness, or is so related to or connected with any party or attorney as to render it improper in his opinion for him to sit on the trial, appeal, or other proceeding therein. 
The key question is "substantial interest.'' There is no specific defi­nition in the law of the land. There have been several efforts to do this, and we hope we can be successful finally. The jurisdictions of the United States are not unanimous. The fourth and the fifth circuits have different standards of what a substantial interest shall mean, and the majority of the opinions, as Judge Frank pointed out, when he testified here in support of Judge Haynsworth, is another matter. 
"Would you care to give this committee the benefit of your thinking relative to "substantial interest" and how you think it should be defined? 
Should it be defined pursuant to the fourth circuit, the fifth cir­cuit, or the preponderance of circuits which say that if you have any interest, you should disqualify yourself? 
Judge CARSWELL. That makes it necessary to respond in two ways. No. 1. there is an opinion of the fifth circuit that speaks to this point. In the case of Kannear-Weed—I can srive you the citation—it attempts to define in specific terms what "substantial interest" means. 
This opinion was rendered by the Court before I participated in it. T was a district judge when it came down. I am aware and have had many discussions, many times, with many judges, across this land about this very matter. 
This was one of the major discussions at the National Judicial Conference that was held here in Washington last June 10, when I was district judge representative for the fifth circuit we explored this whole area. 
They came forth with that resolution that was then adopted. It was adopted into this general area. I voted for that resolution as it was then adopted in June of 1969. Subsequently, it had some modifi­cation placed upon it in September of 1969. 
I am aware of the fact that Chief Justice Traynor of the Cali­fornia Supreme Court has a committee of the bar that are working very diligently at this to come to grips with it. This is a most difficult area, as to what is the interest that should be there, what are the proper standards. 
I personally. Senator, can tell you this, and put it in this record, concerning the areas of compensation of judges. Perhaps I am volun­teering, but I would just answer, perhaps speak to both of them at the same time. I have never received any fee for any outside activities of anv nature. 
Now, there are many competent judges who, I think, have good, valid reasons to lecture at law schools. There is a hazard, perhaps, here in breaking the tie between the academic world and the bench, and there ought to be, perhaps, some reasonable fee under those cir­cumstances. I don't attempt to pass judgment upon whatever is deter­mined there. 
It is simply that in my position, I have not accepted and will not accept any fees for outside services, period. 
Senator BAYH. I have another question I would like you to direct yourself to. I am glad to have your personal standards on the record. You know now that you are going to be on the Supreme Court if this nomination is confirmed, which I think it will be. 
Judge CARSWELL. Nice of you to tell me. 
Senator BAYH. IS your personal standard going to be the standard that you hold other judges accountable to? Is it going to be the fifth circuit's standard, which says it is all right to own some stock? 
Judge CARSWELL. I am going to go by Harrold Carswell's standard, and I don't think you can beat it. If you don't have any, don't accept fees for outside services, there can be no controversy about it. 
If there is an}7 question of conflict of interest in the judge's mind or anything to make somebody think he is hiding or his mind is turned or pushed in a certain way, he shouldn't sit on the case. I never have, and I don't intend to in the future. 
I intend to follow the same course of conduct I have followed for the lust 12 years, regardless of what someone writes as a code of ethics for the fraternity as a group. 
Senator BAYH. The reason I bring this matter to your attention, and would like to proceed just a bit further on it, is that while you were on the fifth circuit, this Southern Louisiana Gas rate case came before your circuit and two of the judges involved had what, to me, would appear to be significant holdings. 
Now, perhaps you could explain—as I recall the case, the court stated that the judges were not disqualified—I don't know whether this was a message over the telephone that was later made public, but the court later stated that the judges were not disqualified because of the interests that they had, but that they automatically withdrew themselves voluntarily from the case. 
Would you help to define that for us, please ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, it wasn't a telephone message, it was a printed opinion about that, a per curiam opinion, consisting of two fellow judges and me. There were three of us called to sit on this case. 
Incidentally, it was once printed that I refused to disclose my stock-holdings, I didn't refuse; it never occurred to me to tell anybody that I didn't have any. That was the fact about that. 
But after this matter arose, the two judges of that panel made dis­closure of their holdings in these two companies. This* was a per curiam opinion, where we disqualified the entire panel. I disqualified myself because immediately following the first couple of hours of hearings, we had had a previous discussion about the case. This is just exactly in the area that I was discussing with you earlier. I felt it would be improper for me to continue even if they were not because then it might be said, or someone might think, that I had in turn gotten myself involved into some of their potential or possible, or apparent, disqualification. 
Out of an abundance of caution, this action was taken by each of those judges. The opinion speaks for itself; it is a per curiam opinion. It speaks for all three of us. I cannot comment any more on it other than that. It would be improper to do so. 
Senator BAYH. I want to refresh my memory, because I am sure you, having dealt personally with that case, are better qualified to testify to it than I. As I recall, the opinion stated that although we do not feel disqualified, we voluntarily withdraw ourselves from the case. 
Now, is my interpretation erroneous ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I cannot attempt to interpret an opinion of the court of which we were a part. It will have to speak for itself. Senator BAYH. Fine. Is it your judgment that if a person has any substantial interest, he should withdraw himself from the case ? 
Judge CARSWELL. That is a matter of statute, and certainly he should. I call that a minimal statute. Senator BAYH. IS any interest a substantial interest ? Judge CARSWELL. That is a matter of judgment, and upon the facts 
and circumstances of each case under the law. 
Senator BAYH. That is right. That is exactly where we get into the fact that the greatest preponderance of jurisdiction in this country, according to what Judge Frank said, is if you have any interest at all, }"ou disqualify yourself; the fifth circuit says if you have a relatively small interest in a large firm, you need not disqualify; and the fourth circuit says it is all right if you make this public. 
What I want to know is what is the standard going to be on the Court? Judge CARSWELL. I respectfully have to not answer that. Obviously your suggestion is that there is a conflict in the circuits. 
Senator BAYH. I think there is. 
Judge CARSWELL. Then, inevitably, that can only be resolved b}r the Supreme Court of the United States, and quite clarify, it is improper for me to express an opinion about that specific issue. Senator BAYH. And, quite obviously, it would be my responsibility to find out what your opinion is on this. Judge CARSWELL. I have given you my personal opinion. I cannot give you my standing on cases in court that should be resolved. 
Senator BAYH. I realize that there are bound to be lines that you cannot cross over, but I think this a legitimate area of interest for those of us who want to try to increase that standard. 
Are you conversant with the various canons of ethics that deal with impropriety and appearance of impropriety—canons 4, 13, 24, 29, 33, and 34? If you want me to read excerpts from them, I will, but I think you are certainly conversant with them. 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. In trying to reach a determination of what is ethi­cal conduct and what is not, do you believe that these legal canons of ethics have received consideration by the judiciary? 
Let me just read a couple of things that concern me, because in the matter which we struggled through earlier, the Haynsworth matter, frankly, I was never convinced in my own mind that Judge Haynsworth got involved in any impropriety, but there was a great appearance of impropriety. 
We are trying to give the appearance of justice in our courts. That is why this canon says that a judge's official conduct should be free from impropriety and from appearance of impropriety. So it talks in 13 about kinship of influence and—we are talking about impro­priety and the appearance of impropriety, and I wonder if you thought the strong burden placed on members of the bar as well as members of the bench should be used in reaching a national standard for judges? 
Judge CARSWELL. If you're speaking in the abstract as to what I personally believe, if I drew up and wrote legislation, Senator, on the subject 
Senator BAYH. Well, I am talking 
Judge CARSWELL. Certainly a judge should not sit in a case where there is any appearance of impropriety. It is just that flat and simple. If there is anything more about the question that I have missed, I would like to know it. 
Senator BAYH. Well, are you saying that you feel the canons of ethics should be used in trying to determine the standards of conduct 
Judge CARSWELL. Concerning that specific canon of ethics: I would think the whole question of attempting to boil down moral and ethical standards into a code, ever since the Sermon on the Mount, has been rather difficult. The mechanical and intellectual process of putting into words these notions and ideas is itself difficult. 
I have no objections to these canons; certainly they should be con­sidered. They are fine principles, and they should be considered along with other appropriate standards of ethical conduct across the spec­trum of the matter. 
Senator BAYH. I won't ask you to comment on this, because I am sure it will fry right in the face of your understandable reluctance to deal with past cases. But to show you why I am asking you this, the latest decision relative to standards of conduct came down in 1968 in the Commonwealth Coatings case, Commonwealth Coatings 
v. Continental Coating, in which the court simply referred to the canon of ethics 33 in sustaining the position of the court to over­throw a lower court. 
That is why I think it is an important thing for our consideration. Do you believe a judge should sit on cases involving close relatives, 
or in which such a relative is such a counsel. Judge CARSWELL. I didn't hear the last part of your question. Senator BAYH. DO you believe a judge should sit on a case involving 
close relatives or in which a close relative is a counsel ? Judge CARSWELL. XO, he should not. Senator BAYIT. I think this is a normal question relative to Governor 
Kirk's efforts in the Florida case, in which I understand your son-in­law is one of the counsel for the Governor, is he not? Judge CARSWELL. He has a legal job in Governor Kirk's office. What his duties are. I haven't the slightest idea. Senator BAYH. Nevertheless, you said you felt that you should not sit 
on a case in which counsel is a close relative? Judge CARSWELL. A judge should not. Senator BAYH. Let me ask you a question on a matter on which some 
criticism has been forthcoming. I would like to give you the oppor­tunity to answer this before some criticism is made in the record. This business of this party or social event that was held in your home relative to what some people have alleged were lobbying activities— 
would you give us your understanding of this so we can put the record straight on it? 
Senator TYDINGS. Mr. Chairman, why don't you put in the record the article that appeared in the Philadelphia Inquirer. I think that is the story to which Senator Bayh is referring. The headline is, "Party at Carswell Home Linked to Track Lobbyist.'' 
Judge CARSWELL,. I don't know what the article is. Senator BAYH. I have another article, several pages about it. Judge CARSWELL. I'll give my statement without regard to what any 
article sa3rs, because I know only what I know and that is all I know, 
and I am happy to tell you. Senator BAYH. That is all we want to know. Judge CARSWELL. All right, sir. I had nothing whatsoever personally to do with that party being 
held under my roof. My brother-in-law, Jack Simmons, Jr., and his wife live—not immediately adjacent to us, but one house between. 
Two of their children, ages 15 and 13, were killed in a tragic auto­mobile accident on Saturday, the 1st of March, 1969. Which is not in­frequently the case in our family, my wife, who is the sister of the father of these children, was asked if they could bring a party of people to our home because they simply felt that they could not have that party at their home. 
These arrangements were made primarily between the wives, be­tween my brother-in-law and sister and my wife. As I recall, I came into the party somewhat late. I knew some of the people there, some of the people I did not know. And, Senator, that is just all in the world there is to that, as far as I know. I had absolutely nothing to do with any of the suggestions of lobbying. I don't even know what was being lobbied. 
Senator BAYH. One of the names in at least one of the articles I 
have here—I suppose it is in the one Senator Tydings referred to The CHAIRMAN. Joe, do you want this in the record ? Senator TYDIXGS. Yes, I think we should have it, because it sets 
forth the accusation about which we are concerned. The CHAIRMAN. It will be admitted.
Senator BAYH. Mr. Steve Calder was supposed to have been pushing 
the racetrack and he lobbied some of the guests in your home, and you 
have no personal knowledge of that ? Is that accurate ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I had nothing whatsoever to do with any lobby­
ing at my house, Senator, at all. What conversations occurred between 
guests, they occurred between them and not to my knowledge or with 
my participation in any such activity of any kind whatsoever. 
The sole reason it occurred in my home was because of the request 
of our in-laws as a result of the children's deaths. 
Senator BAYH. One other case I would like to bring up, and then yield to Senator Tydings. It involves the Adams v. United States case, in which a fellow in your office prosecuted in a liquor violation—as I understand, while you were U.S. attorney. 
Later on, when you were judge, this person appeared before you as a result of a charge of perjury in the original trial. Is this the kind of thing that concerns a judge, where he ought to disqualify himself ? 
Do you feel that, really, the fact that you sat as one of the attorneys on one of the sides, prosecutor, in the previous case, that that does not officially constitute a conflict so that you should disqualify yourself? Or have I misunderstood or misinterpreted the facts? 
Judge CARSWELL. I don't know about that, but I do know this: no man who has ever served as U.S. attorney would thereby forever be disqualified to be appointed U.S. district judge. If you give every­one who had appeared before him in a file judicial immunity, so to speak, from the judge's responsibility to try cases that come before him 
Senator BAYH. I'm. not suggesting that at all. I am suggesting that perhaps it is something to be concerned about if a pan is accused of a perjury charge in one case in which a man is district attorney, when that perjury charge is then tried, the previous prosecuting attorney finds himself judge. 
Judge CARSWELL. All I can say to that is that the majority of the court held that it was perfectly proper for me to sit on the case. As a matter of fact, it never was suggested to me at the time the case was tried that there was anything improper about it. 
It was only after the case was on appeal and he had been con­victed in this regard, that he filed a section 2255 collateral attack. This was raised on a collateral attack. I am sure I know what you're talking about here, because there was a dissenting opinion in that case. 
Two of the judges, Judges Tuttle and Bell, held that it was per­fectly proper for me to sit. Judge Brown said it probably would have been better if I hadn't, but he went on to say he knew it was a com­pletely fair trial in every respect, as the record will show. 
Senator BAYH. I think you will find that basically, because the issue was not raised earlier, as you pointed out, it was later raised on appeal. 
Judge CARSWELL. I would have to let the record speak for itself in that regard. It was sustained. 
Senator BAYH. I am through. I appreciate your patience. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Tydings wants to ask some questions, and we shall resume after the rollcall. 
The CHAIRMAN. Let's have order, please. 
Judge, is there anything else you would like to say about the country club case? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir; I would like to make this one statement : Whatever the records show about that, of course, is the highest and best evidence. I testified here purely from memory. 
No. 1,1 had absolutely no discussion with anyone at any time about this matter having anything to do with discriminatory practices, if there were any. 
No. 2, what I have to say about the matter is that whatever the records show and whatever capacity it may be listed that I am in, whether it be director, president, incorporator, or potentate, as I tried to suggest earlier, I had no conversations with anyone about any activities of that organization in any manner at all. 
Now, what the details of the corporate transactions are as to when one was formed and what name appears on what piece of paper, those records would be the best evidence. I respectfully request that I be afforded the opportunity to get them in the record as fast as they get here, and they are already on the way. 
The CHAIRMAN. YOU will be afforded that opportunity. 
Senator Tydings. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Carswell, you have been interrogated al­ready about the 1948 racial supremacy speech. In your answer you repudiated it, said it was anathema to you, and repugnant to your* position and your feelings of today. 
You quite properly stated to the committee that we must determine whether or not you speak with conviction. You must realize that even though you have repudiated the speech today, that statement is in­sulting to many, many Americans. I think it would be helpful to us in determining just what your convictions are today, if we knew whether or not, even back in 1948, you were associated with those groups in your local community who are referred to, for lack of a better word, as the Ku Kluxers or the wool hat faction of politics. Were you a part of that political faction in Georgia when you were running for the legislature? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir; no, indeed. Senator TYDINGS. With which political faction were you associated ? How would you describe your classification as a candidate? Judge CARSWELL. Classified with the other candidates in that par­ticular campaign ? I was the liberal candidate, without a doubt. 
Senator TYDINGS. HOW old were you at the time ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I was then 28 years old. 
Senator TYDINGS. Had you been involved in Georgia politics prior to that time in any way, for example, had you been involved in any governorship race ? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, I was 10 years old when my father made a campaign for the governorship of Georgia, but I really didn't have much to do with that, either. 
Senator TYDINGS. Were you a lieutenant of the late Gov. Gene Talmadge ? Did you support him ? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, I did not support him. As a matter of fact, I supported, in 1956. in the same Irwinton Bulletin, his opponent, James V. Carmichael, and had something to say about that. 
lie was certainly the liberal candidate in 1946. 
Senator TYDINGS. Would you care to comment on why yon lost the race when you ran for the legislature? 
Judge CARSWELL. I was considered too young, just out of the serv­ice, not to be trusted, on the liberal side, a little dangerous in racial matters, and as much too much of a liberal. 
There was no question about it. I think that my opponents won the 
election on that basis. Senator TYDINGS. A few questions on another area, Judge Carswell. You were the elected representative of the district judges from 
the Fifth Judicial Circuit at the meeting of the Judicial Conference on June 10, were you not ? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. I was elected at Dallas the preceding April—April of 1968. Senator TYDINGS. And you supported the resolution of June 10 
pertaining to financial disclosure and nonjudicial activities? Judge CARSWELL. I did do so. Senator TYPINGS. Do you believe that the resolutions 
that were promulgated while you were down there had merit then and still have merit? Judge CARSWELL. It certainly has merit. Senator. In saying this, in complete candor, I would have to amplify that a little bit. 
This matter needs some most careful study, as it is getting noAv. There are many ideas, and it would be my personal one, as I indicated earlier, that no judge should receive compensation for outside serv­ices that he renders. There are many thoroughly honest, thoroughly able judges throughout this country, and have been for many, many years, who have participated in lecture series at our great universities. There is a great body of opinion in the academic world and elsewhere that stands for the proposition that we should not cut these lines and that there should be some reasonable fee for those kinds of services. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge, let me ask, just to save your time and the committee's time, do you believe in the public disclosure aspect of that resolution of the Judicial Conference ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I do personally. I would not necessarily want all 
others to do so. Senator TYDINGS. Why not ? Judge CARSWELL,. Because this is a matter that I think needs to be 
worked upon and we need to get all the returns, so to speak, from Chief Justice Traynor's work and from the Senator TYDINGS. Why did you support the resolution on June 10 if you don't believe all judges should make disclosure ? 
Judge CARSWELL. If it came before me to ATote, Senator, I would so vote now. I didn't mean to indicate otherwise. I would be perfectly willing, however, to have this matter examined in depth, which we didn't do, frankly, in 2 or 3 days. 
Senator TYDINGS. DO you think the same restrictions should be imposed upon Justices of the Supreme Court as on all other Federal judges ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Definitely. 
Senator TYDINGS. YOU are aware, I suppose, of some of the reasons why the Judicial Conference took a step backward on November 1 and declined to support the June 10 resolutions? 
You are aware, of course, that at least two Justices of the Supreme Court have publicly stated that they would refuse to support any type of judicial disclosure? 
Judge CARSWELL. I can't speak for them. 
Senator TYDINGS. If you are elevated to the Supreme Court, are you going to be one of those Justices who take the position that be­cause they are Justices of the Supreme Court, they should not be sub­ject to any financial disclosure requirements? 
Judge CARSWELL. I personally—I cannot speak for what the Court may do as an institution, but I personally, as a Justice of the Supreme Court, would willingly make the same disclosure as a Justice of the Supreme Court as I have made and would make to this committee. 
Senator TYDINGS. I commend you for that, No. 1. No. 2, are you going to be passive on the Supreme Court on this issue or are you going to be willing to state to the other Justices that you feel a Justice of the Supreme Court has the same responsibility as other judges of the Federal court ? Because that is important to some of us. 
Judge CARSWELL. That is difficult to answer. I certainly will give my views, Senator. I expect that they will know them by tomorrow morning. But what will be heard by them if I am a member of the Court and their response to it, I certainly couldn't speak of the Court, for the Court as an institution. I am not yet a member of it. 
Senator TYDINGS. Let me rephrase the question. 
Do you see any constitutional or philosophical reason why Justices of the Supreme Court should not be subject to the same reporting requirements as lower court judges? 
Judge CARSWELL. Philosophically, I can see none whatsoever. Con­stitutionally, I would respectfully have to decline to answer the ques­tion on the matter, because that is directly in the area of these other things we have discussed before. 
Senator TYDINGS. If the Supreme Court did not choose m tne years to come to follow guidelines set down by the Judicial Conference with respect to disclosure, such as the June 10 resolution, would you volun­tarily make such a disclosure, even though some Justices of the Su­preme Court might not ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I would so do. 
Senator TYDINGS. In 1963, the Judicial Conference of the United States adopted the resolution "That no Justice or Judge of the United States shall serve in the capacity of an officer, director, or employee of a corporation organized for profit." 
I understand from your testimony that you strongly support this position ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I certainly do, Senator. I always have. 
Senator TYDINGS. DO you feel that it should be applicable to Su­preme Court Justices just as to any other judge of the Federal courts? Judge CARSWELL. Without a doubt. Senator TYDINGS. I think, Judge Carswell. you are aware that for 
the past 4 years, the subcommittee which I chair, the Subcommittee on Improvements in Judicial Machinery, has been involved in a detailed study of matters relating to judicial fitness on the Federal Bench. 
In 1968,1 introduced a Judicial Reform Act, and it has been reintro­duced in the 91st Congress. The kev feature of the Judicial Reform Act is the establishment within the judiciary of a commission capable of dealing with problems of disability and unfitness. 
Now, do you feel that there is any need within the Federal judiciary for such a commission ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I have to be very careful in answering this and not be evasive at all. I certainly do not speak to any pending legislation that might come before the Court. I cannot do so. 
I can say this, and do say this, that we all must recognize, as I am sure you. Senator Tydings, do 
Senator TYDINGS. The machinery need not come by legislative action. It could come by resolution of the Supreme Court of the United States or resolution of the Judicial Conference. Legislation is the last straw, the last recourse, so to speak. 
Judge CARSWELL. There is a problem within the judiciary in this field. Certainly it has to do with the senile, the sick, the improper judge. It is a serious problem, and we definitely need some established procedures to deal with them. There is no question about that. 
Senator TYDINGS. Would you agree with the statement that, as pres­ently constituted, there is no adequate machinery within, the Federal Judiciary System for the removal or the retirement of the unfit or dis­abled judge? 
Judge CARSWELL. The word "adequate," of course, is the key to the question. We have some procedures through the Judicial Councils. This is in an administrative area, not a judicial area. I think I can speak on this. 
Some of the councils, in my judgment, have not taken an aggressive enough role and used the tools that they have available to them in this area. I think that may be the proper approach. 
I share with you the overall aim of finding some instrument that will bring all of this into focus where it can be acted upon promptly and properly, with due respect to the person involved. 
Senator TYDINGS. What is your feeling about mandatory senior judge status at the age of 70? 
Judge CARSWELL. I have a very firm opinion about this and I don't hesitate to give it to you. I hope this is not beyond the realm of passing on the constitutionality of matters. I hesitate only to answer 
Senator TYDINGS. Senior judge status. 
Judge CARSWELL. This, of course, would not be applicable to the Supreme Court. Senator TYDINGS. No. 
Judge CARSWELL. With that understanding, I will answer it with­
out amT hesitation. I think it is what ought to be, it should be. I am in favor of it and always have been. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Carswell, let me return to the Southern Louisiana Rate case, in which you were a member of a panel with Judge Brown and Judge Jones. The issue arose as to whether Judges Brown arid Jones should disqualify themselves from the case. 
Tt is my understanding and recollection that initially in that case, the "judges who were to disqualify themselves wrote letters to counsel in which they advised counsel that they had interests in the various oil companies which might be affected by the case. They asked the counsel to come forward, if they wished, and suggest that they disqualify themselves. Is that a fair description of the history of that case? 
Judge CARSWELL. I cannot speak to this on this point, Senator, be­cause I simply don't know what the actions of the judges to whom you refer were. I had no stockholdings in the case, don't now. 1 do know, of course, and the opinion so states, that the whole panel was dissolved and there was never any exercise of any judicial function whatsoever by any one of the three of us at all. 
I took the route of being very, very cautious, overly cautions, it may be. There was some question in my mind whether I should have asked a brother judge to take on such a task and decide that case. I might well have been criticized for evading a piece of hard work. But I felt in my own mind that, this case having been put together in one panel 
Senator TYDINGS. I think the final step that was taken was the best step and the only step. 
Judge CARSWELL. That is all I 
Senator TYDINGS. The first step of sending the letter seems to me to have been an insufficient step. I think that evidently your panel agreed with that when they disqualified themselves. Judge CARSWELL. I can only speak to what the opinion of the court was. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Carswell, do you know whether or not, in your race for the legislature in 1948, you were opposed by the Ku KluxKlan? 
Judge CARSWELL. I don't know who the members of the Ku Klux Klan were, but I certainly did not have their support. If the Klan was active in that campaign at all, it went to my opponent, not to me. 
Senator TYDINGS. I have no further questions, Judge Carswell, ex­cept to say that the speech was unfortunate and that, as you pointed out, the members of the committee will have to pass upon your sincerity in renouncing the ideas expressed in that speech. 
Before we recess, I would like to make two statements for the record, since I shall not be here in the morning. Tomorrow, there are going to be two witnesses who, if I were here, I would comment upon to the committee. 
The first witness I would like to make reference to is Gov. Leroy Collins of Florida, in my judgment one of the great public servants of this generation. I would like for the record to make that comment for vaj brother members of this committee, and to formally welcome him to testify before this committee. 
It has been my privilege to know Governor Collins since I first worked for Senator Jack Kennedy in the Florida campaign for the Presidency in 1960. Since then, my every experience with Governor Collins has shown me that he is a man of the highest integrity and, a great American. 
I would also like for the record to state that the President of the Florida bar, Mark Hulsey, Jr., is a partner of one of my oldest and closest friends from Jacksonville, Fla., Lloyd Smith. 
I have known Mark Hulsey, myself, personally, for some period of time. He has a very fine record in the bar. He has been president of the Florida bar, which I understand is the oldest integrated bar in the South. 
He has also been very active in civic affairs in his State. He is a fine gentleman. 
Senator Tliurmond, do you have anything to add ? Otherwise, we will recess until tomorrow morning at 10. Senator THURMOND. I think the chairman said to recess after you 
have finished until tomorrow morning, so I shall wait until then. Senator TYDINGS. We shall now recess until 10 a.m. 
 
Judge CARSWELL. Thank you, sir. 
Senator FONG. I have listened to the questions put to you and your answers to them and I congratulate you on the candor and frankness of your answers. Up to now, I am satisfied that the answers you have given satisfy me that you are worthy of confirmation. 
Judge CARSWELL. I appreciate that very much, Senator. 
Senator FONG. I have very few questions to ask you, except again to ask you whether deep down in your heart you feel any prejudice, any bias against any individual because of race, color or creed? 
Judge CARSWELL. Absolutely not. 
Senator FONG. And you feel that you can be a fair and impartial judge and that racial feelings will not enter into the decisions in your duties as an Associate Justice? 
Judge CARSWELL. I am positive of that, Senator. Senator FONG. Thank you very much, sir. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Thurmond. Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Carswell, I would like to congratulate you upon your appoint­
ment to the Supreme Court, and I would also like to congratulate President Nixon upon selecting you to fill this highposition. I feel that at your age, you will be on the Court for a long time and will render great service to our Nation. You have a reputation for being a man of unquestioned integrity, impeccable character, a person of outstanding ability, of being a legal scholar, a studious worker. It is my judgment that you will perform a magnificent service to the Supreme Court. 
I believe you graduated from Duke University ? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. Senator THURMOND. And after that, you attended the University of 
Georgia Law School ? Judge CARSWELL. Briefly until Pearl Harbor caused the closing down of law schools generally. Senator THURMOND. Then you completed your law degree at Mercer 
University? Judge CARSWELL. That is correct. Senator THURMOND. There was an interim period when you were out 
of school, according to the biography, I believe—you were in service 
from 1942 until 1945 ? Judge CARSWELL. That is correct, Senator. Senator THURMOND. In the Navy in World War II ? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. Senator THURMOND. And that accounts for the period after you 
attended the University of Georgia ? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. Senator THURMOND. I believe the record shows that you were ap­
pointed U.S. attorney by President Eisenhower, then appointed as 
district judge at the age of 34, probably the youngest in the Nation. Judge CARSWELL. 38, Senator. Senator THURMOND. Was it 38 ? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. Senator THURMOND. YOU were appointed U.S. attorney at 34, I 
believe. Judge CARSWELL. 33. Senator THURMOND. And U.S. district judge at 38? Then circuit 
judge. So you have served in all echelons of the Federal judiciary up to this point and your appointment to the Supreme Court would naturally be the next step if you are elevated, is that correct ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir, that would be an accurate statement. 
Senator THURMOND. There has been a good deal said about balancing the Court. I think the public generally feels that there should be more balance, on the Court, and President Nixon says there should be more balance on the Court. I was not surprised that he selected a person who has a reputation of having a conservative philosophy, because you cannot bring a balance to the Court unless that were done. I realize that some who do not favor such a policy would be opposed to you for that reason. 
President Nixon has also stated publicly that he favored a judge who would interpret the law of the Constitution and not attempt to rewrite it. He has also said he favors a strict constructionist. And he evidently feels that you possess the qualities to carry into effect those thoughts. There is nothing wrong with this; it is perfectly proper. If a President wishes to change the complexion of the Court, that is the only way to do it. I was pleased that the American Bar Association, in their letter to Senator Eastland. our chairman, stated 
that you are a man of integrity and judicial temperament and possessed of professional competence and unanimously recommended you as being qualified for the Supreme Court. 
Now, as to your decisions, I shall not dwell at length on them. I want to say that, in looking at these decisions, it appears that you demonstrate an ability on your part to single out the issues in the case, to bring together the facts and applicable law, and succinctly state the conclusion with brevity and exactness. This style of writing judicial opinions is somewhat unique today, for the opinions of many of our judges are too long and superfluous. This style of legal writing indicates that you are capable of exactness in considering and inter­preting a question of law. This ability certainly commends you to the position for which you have been selected. 
There is nothing in your record that I have found that shows you do not believe in equality and fair treatment to all. There are some groups in this country who will take the position that possibly you do not believe in equality because you have not decided every case in their favor. There are some groups in this country who want a judge to go with them on every case, right or wrong. All a judge can do and should do is to hand down the decision in accordance with the law and the facts in the case. There is nothing in the record that I have found that indicates that you have done otherwise. 
I was interested in reading an article which appeared in the paper, bv Mr. Fred P. Graham, of the New York Times, entitled "Carswell's Credo Is Restraint." 
On the question there of desegregation, the article stated this: "And when precedents"—speaking of civil rights precedents—"have existed, he has struck down segregation in crisp, forthright opinions. In 1965, he declared that the barbershop in Tallahassee's Duval Hotel had to serve Negroes under the public accommodations provision of the Civil Eights Act of 1964. He brushed aside a barber's assertion"-—someone said that was your barber: I don't know whether it was or not, but it doesn't make any difference—"a barber's assertion that he was not covered because 95 percent of the customers were local people and not guests in the hotel." 
From a reading of that, it is clear Judge Carswell observed that relative percentage of local as well as transient customers may not be used as criteria to determine coverage. 
In 1960, when Tallahassee Negroes sued to desegregate the counters, waiting 
rooms and restrooms in the city-owned airport, he did not hesitate to order 
desegregation. Are those statements correct, Judge Carswell? Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir that is a correct statement of the holdings in those cases; yes, sir.Senator THURMOND. This was written by Mr. Graham for the New York Times, I believe. Judge CARSWELL. That is a correct analysis of the cases. Senator THURMOND. NOW, quoting further from this article, it says: Tom Harris, an official of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of 
Industrial Organizations, who led the successful attack against Judge Hayns­
worth, said today that Judge Carswell doesn't appear to have a significant 
record on labor eases. He says the AFL—CIO had no plans at present to oppose 
him. The few labor opinions that Judge Carswell has written reflect his re­luctance to use judicial power and his tendency not to extend the judiciary's power. 
I was pleased to see that statement that Mr. Graham wrote about 
you, about extending judicial power and your reluctance to use judi­
cial power and tendency not to extend the judiciary power. I think 
that is one common complaint the public in this country have today, 
about judges extending the judiciary power. 
On the matter of injunctions, I was impressed with this statement: 
It is my view that the injunctive power of the court should never be invoked 
lightly, nor should it be converted into a mere ministerial function triggered 
automatically upon the finding of an infraction of the law. 
Mr. Graham quotes further on the question of established law. He quotes this: Judge Carswell's opinions tend to be bloodless documents, setting out the facts and the precedents, then briskly coming to a conclusion that is said to be within the precedents. He is not given to broad statements of his philosophy, for his creed at this point in his career seems to have been summed up in one statement from an opinion he wrote shortly after he became a judge in 1958: "Established law with its imperfections must nonetheless be applied as it is and not on the predilections of the court." 
All of these seem to be sound principles, and I was impressed with 
them. From your record as I have been able to ascertain it, you believe 
in deciding a case on the law and the facts and that you would follow 
the Constitution and uphold the Constitution, that you would be fair 
and just to all, discriminate against none, and show favoritism to none. 
Is that your philosophy ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I certainly would so seek to do, Senator Thur­mond. 
Senator THURMOND. I shall be pleased to support your confirmation. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Senator KENNEDY. Senator Cook. 
Senator COOK. Judge Carswell, I think it is interesting to note some of the reports of the newspapers of the last few days, because one of the problems that we face—by the way, I might say that most of these fellows sitting at the table that are with newspapers should have become your friend yesterday when you discussed the fact that you worked for the Macon newspaper and were paid very, very little. I think most of them in this room probably feel the same way about it. 
But one of the things I think we fail to do when we analyze a nominee and when we seek to promote a particular thing, I think we fail to look at history. In regard to history and in regard to your 1948 speech, I would like to read into the record some history, and I hope that I can read before we are through with these hearings some more statements by other individuals who are now members of the Supreme Court, things that have been said about them. Then I thing we can evaluate whether history can in fact change a person and whether history can in fact improve one's attitude toward the social problems of this Nation. 
In 1937, Senator Hugo L. Black from Alabama was nominated to be Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Both at the time of his nomina­tion in August of 1937 and following his confirmation in the fall of 
59 
that year, it was urged that Justice Black should be refused confirma­tion because while in Alabama politics, he had been a member of the Ku Klux Klan. These charges were summarized by Senator Copeland of New York in a speech that he delivered on the floor of the Senate. For those who would like to read that entire speech, it is in 81st Con­gressional Record at pages 9068 to 9069. But let me quote some of the things that were said on that occasion. This is what Senator Copeland said: 
Does the leopard change his spots? Will Mr. Justice Black be any different than candidate Black, who, according to the Mobile Register of August 15, 1926. backed by the Klan, had a walk away in his race to the Senatorial nomination? 
Likewise, the New York World said: With Alabama's most powerful political organization, the Klan, backing him. Hugo L. Black seems to have won the Senate nomination beyond a reasonable doubt. In Black, the Alabama Klan has a loyal and devoted friend. 
The New York Times for August 9, 1926, said "Black has devoted part of his late campaigning to voicing opposition to Governor Al Smith in an effort to hold his part of the Klan's support." 
The Senator went on to say: From the time he came into the Senate. Mr. Black has been a leader against all efforts to pass an anti-lynching bill. Within two weeks, he moved to table my own motion to add this rider to a pending bill. 
Following Justice Black's confirmation, amid public criticism trig­gered by a series of articles in the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Justice Black made a national radio speech on October 1, 1937, in which he admitted that he had at one time been a member of the Klan, but vigorously denied that he had ever subscribed to any of the principles of the Klan. 
Now, the point I am trying to make, Judge, is that I am afraid when many of the people write articles and when many of the people make statements, they do in fact forget history. And' I would hope that before these hearings are over, I can give you statements made by other members w7ho are now on the Supreme Court of the United States that will be far, far more shocking than the remarks that have been made about Justice Hugo L. Black. And I would suggest that for many of those who will testify, who will testify against your nomination, they had better prepare themselves to admit that man in fact, in a changing social atmosphere, not only does logically and honestly change his mind, but he has to change his mind and he has to change it based on our society. I must admit that, and I have used it quite frequently, it is a very good thing they do, because we have had to pull an awful lot of people kicking and screaming into the twentieth century. 
Justice Carswell, there was some conversation yesterday about the case of Ida Phillips y. The Martin Marietta Corporation. You did not hear that case, did you? 
Judge CARSWELL. I don't recall the particular case at the moment, 
Senator. Could you give me a little bit better reading on it ? 
Senator COOK. It was a case that was heard before Judge—is it Gewin ? Judge CARSWELL. Judge Gewin. Senator COOK. It says "The petition for rehearing is denied and 
the Court having been polled at the request of one of the members of the Court and a majority of the circuit judges who are in regular active service not having voted in favor of it." This was pursuant to rule 35 of the Federal Rules of Appellate procedure, Local Fifth Circuit, rule 12. 
The rehearing en bane was also denied. Now, in this, when the judges were polled, did all of the judges receive an entire copy of the record ? If you recall ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Senator Cook, I just don't know in that particular instance. I would assume that the normal procedure was followed and the workings, inner workings of the court in this regard were just a pure administrative matter of mailing papers back and forth between the officers. The judges lived in different cities. The routine procedure in this is to send around what we call a pink slip proce­dure, calling attention to the fact that there may be a desire to reexamine an opinion. That would be a request for an en bane hearing. It does not necessarily mean that the opinion is under attack or that the judge requesting an en bane is absolutely committed and has made up his mind that it is to be changed or wants it changed, or that he even wants to dissent about it. 
It is a mechanical procedure, sending out a notice to fellow judges on the bench, something as a warning to the effect that something about this disturbs me, I want to hear a little more about it, want to know something more about it. It may mean that this is a terrible opinion and I certainly don't want to be associated with it and I wash my hands of it, that sort of thing. That doesn't necessarily follow in every instance. 
Senator BAYH. Would the Senator yield just for procedure here, please ? 
Senator COOK. Yes. 
Senator BAYH. In other words, it is possible for a judge who votes in favor of a case or to sustain a position to ask for an en bane ruling, which could only have the effect of overruling? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, Senator: that isn't what I said and that is not what I meant to say and that isn't the import of my words at all. What I meant and repeat is this—any judge sitting on a large court, and by the way, I am a member of the largest Constitutional court in the world, they tell me. We have something like 15 judges now. The judges sit in panels of three, the case we are talking about here is a case on which I did not sit on the panel. 
Senator COOK. YOU did not? 
Senator BAYH. The case I called to your attention was brought to my attention personally, which I brought to your attention 2 days ago, so you were warned it was going to come up. 
Judge CARSWELL. Certainly. 
I would like to complete my remark to this extent and only to this extent: A judge who votes for an en bane hearing is not voting to over­turn a panel decision if it has been published. It merely means, only means, I want to take a better look at this thing, let's have another hearing on it. There is something about it obviously disturbing. Maybe some of the language, maybe some of the dicta that had nothing to do with the crucial issue, but it may come out later in a confusing manner in other instances; it may be cited as a precedent in a peculiar context. So this is a standard judicial procedure that I am sure is followed by every court in the country. I don't think there is a judge in the country who has ever approached a hearing or a vote for an en bane hearing on any other basis. To do so is to commit yourself before you ever have the hearing. 
Certainly I never voted for an en bane hearing with a firm convic­tion that I was going to go the other way. Although sometimes, you may be sure you are m sharp disagreement with the opinion. It might be that, but isn't necessarily that. That is all I am saying. 
Senator BAYH. I appreciate that. 
Senator COOK. The problem in this case involves a woman with two children and the Martin Marietta Corp., who had a rule that she could not be employed if she had some children. And you have been accused of being against women, which is an odd sort of thing to be said about men. 
But the point I am trying to make is you did not sit on this case at all ? You did not hear it ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I recall the case now that you have given me the facts and the context of it. Yes, this is the one Senator Bayh men­tioned yesterday. 
I was not on the three judge panel that heard the arguments in that case. Also, there were two of those judges who saw it one way under the particular facts of that particular case and wrote an opinion, one judge dissenting and asking for an en bane, again, calling upon his brother judges, of whom there are a dozen others, to take a look at it and see whether you think it should be overturned or not; Is there something here so bad about this opinion that you think it should definitely be overturned ? Based upon those facts and upon those con­ditions, then the judge voted and I voted to sustain the two judges who had voted as they did; that is to say, I voted that it wasn't necessary, as far as I was concerned, to have an en bane hearing. 
Senator COOK. But this does not preclude this case from being 
appealed ?Judge CARSWELL. Certainly it doesn't. Senator COOK. This is the point I wanted to make in regard to the 
comment. Judge CARSWELL. YOU mean appealed to the Supreme Court? Senator COOK. That is correct. Judge CARSWELL. Why, certainly not. Senator COOK. Mr. Chairman, I believe that is all. 
Senator ERVIN. Senator Griffin ? Senator GRIFFIN. Has Senator Scott had an opportunity? Senator SCOTT. If Senator Griffin doesn't mind, I have only about 
two questions. Is that all right? Senator GRIFFIN. Certainly. Senator COOK. If the Senator would yield just a minute I would 
like to put this case in the record to show Judge Carswell's partici­pation m it. It is listed as 416 Feb. 2nd, page 1257. It is the case of Ida Phillips v. Martin Marietta. 
Senator SCOTT. Judge Carswell, yesterday a question was asked as to whether your decisions would be in support of the Constitution. I take it that includes the Bill of Eights. While I was here, I don't recall whether that question was ever broadened to go into that matter of 
40-399—70­
your philosophy a little more. In addition to your answer, that was 
entirely satisfactory to me, that you would indeed support the Con­stitution and your concept of the construction of it, may I ask if that 
also extends to support of the precedents of the Supreme Court so 
far as they are applicable and to other precedents of other courts 
where they have become precedents by virtue of not having been car­
ried through to the Court of last resort? 
Judge CARSWELL. My answer to that would be yes, Senator. This is what I was trying to say yesterday. Perhaps I didn't get it over as clearly as I would like to in one regard. I paraphrased what now Mr. Justice Stewart said when he was before this committee in a similar role. He was asked a similar question, and he responded, and I am paraphrasing as I read it at the time in the press. I wasn't here. I haven't looked at the transcript of the record, for that matter. But in any event, he made a statement in his context to the effect that no, he didn't want any Senator there to vote for his confirmation with the idea that he was going on to the Supreme Court to overturn all the precedents of the Court and to rewrite the Constitution. I would answer you in that same manner. 
Senator SCOTT. Yet, of course, there are times and conditions, such as in the famous ancient case of McNaughton, where subsequent court interpretation may quite properly, in my view, bring about a differ­ent approach to this question of insanity, for example, that was in­volved in that case. 
Judge CARSWELL. NO question, that and many other areas. Senator SCOTT. SO the Court is indeed a growing and expanding body. Judge CARSWELL. It is indeed. The law is a movement, not a monument. 
Senator SCOTT. Something has been said about whether or not judges are bound by stare decisis. That is a very broad question, but would you care to comment on it, what you think of stare decisis? 
Judge CARSWELL. I think what I said yesterday within the context of strict construction-loose construction, and reading the scale from one to the other. There is a little bit of the same play here, Senator Scott. 
We start, of course, with the plain words of the Constitution, with the precedents that are imprinted upon them by the decisions, by the reading we get from the Federalist Papers and all the history that sur­rounded the adoption of that great instrument. We take the cases that have been decided throughout the courts, we put them all in. In the human mind—and judges are human, they are not computers, they fall in upon the mind for a decision based upon the particular facts in that case or controversy in that regard. This is where I referred to tract entitled "The Nature of the Judicial Process." 
Senator SCOTT. Cardozo ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Justice Cardozo. It is a small tract, not any great tome, but it is a fine, explicit attempt to define what really goes on in a man's mind when he is called upon to make these decisions. 
Am I responsive ? I hope to be. 
Senator SCOTT. Not only responsive, but I thought your answer may have shocked some in the audience by establishing that a south­erner can also be a scholar. I was appreciative of that. 
Judge CARSWELL. I apologize if I caused any problem. 
Senator SCOTT. One other question. I had expressed some concern in another matter with reference to another judge on the question of fol­lowing such important landmark precedents as Brown v. the Board of Education. I did not feel that dissents were really justified in the lower courts which appeared to be definitely against that decision when the lower court case again appeared to be on all fours with it. The support of Brown v. the Board of Education as a standing precedent of the Court does not give you any concern, does it? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir. 
Senator SCOTT. That is all I had. 
Senator GRIFFIN. Judge Cars well, as the most junior member on the minority side, I find that almost all of the questions I had intended to ask, have already been asked. Judge CARSWELL. Senator, that has been my role on my large court. I sympathize with you. 
Senator GRIFFIN. I do want to say that I have been very pleased and impressed by your responses. I have had an opportunity to review the financial information you furnished to the committee. And I have had an opportunity to read a few, but not all, of your opinions as a judge. Frankly, I must register my disagreement with those who criticize your opinions by comparing them to a plumber's manual or by indicating concern because your opinions are concise and to the point. 
While some Senators may be unable to comprehend that wisdom and sound judgment can be expressed succinctly and briefly, I want to assure you that there are other Senators who think it can be done, and who admire greatly those who have the ability to do it. 
You have made an impressive appearance before the committee to those who, without looking at your record very carefully or listening to your answers, seek to dismiss your nomination by using such words as "mediocre," all I can say is that so far as I have been able to deter­mine, I believe the Nation could use a lot more of your kind of "mediocrity"; obviously that is intended as a high compliment. 
I believe you have demonstrated before this committee that you are a scholar of law; and that is demonstrated by your opinions. I say that even though I would not agree with each and every one of them". 
There is one area of concern which has not been touched on as yet that I would like your views on. There was some reference made yesterday in a discussion with Senator Hart about the doctrine of separation of powers. At that time you made it clear that you thought there were limits concerning the extent to which the Supreme Court should infringe on the powers of the legislative branch. 
There has been some concern on my part and on the part of some other Senators—and may I say on the part of justices of the Supreme Court and others over the years—that from time to time, sitting jus­tices have not only perhaps infringed on the legislative branch but, have involved themselves in the activities, functions, and decisions of the executive branch. Justice Stone, for example, was called upon several times to perform what were essentially functions of the execu­tive branch. As is well known, Chief Justice Warren served as head of the Warren Commission to investigate the slaying of President Kennedy. And there has been a number of other instances from rime to time when Presidents have called on the members of the judiciary to perform what are essentially executive functions and make execu­tive decision. 
As you know, it was alleged that Mr. Justice Fortas participated so actively in executive branch decisions that it got to the point where it was almost a day to day advisory function, very similar to the func­tion the Attorney General might perform. Would you give us your views concerning the appropriate roles members of the Supreme Court might play in extra-judicial activity? 
Judge CARSWELL. I certainly am in accord with the view that the members of the Supreme Court have quite enough to do, I think, and have the constitutional responsibility to attend to their affairs under the Constitution in the judicial branch of the Government without chores or responsibilities in the sensitive area of executive decision. I don't make this, however, with any criticism of anyone who has been called upon by any President to perform any service that might not be strictly within the bounds, the limits of the work of the Court if it became of any national significance. I certainly have no thought or idea that this President who has nominated me would ever call upon me to do any such thing. I only met the man one time and shook his hand in 1954. 
Senator GRIFFIN. Would it put you in a difficult position however, if he should call upon you at some time ? 
Judge CARSWELL. NO, sir, I don't think this would put me in a dif­ficult position with this President or any other President. If the nature of the request were such that—can't conceive what it would be. But certainly the President of the United States, I think, must, have the overall responsibility; if some statement needed to be made, something of this nature, something of a purely noncontroversial matter. Certainly it should be in the field of the law. I can't conceive of any specific—but say an eleemosynary type of thing. Something of this nature just happen to come to my mind. Certainly a judge should be a good citizen. He certainly shouldn't be a campaigner or politician. He certainly shouldn't be an adviser to Presidents on mat­ters of crucial decision. 
Senator GRIFFIN. Should or shouldn't? 
Judge CARSWELL. Should not. I get into a little trouble. This is a southerner's problem. We say shouldn't when we mean should not. Should not be an adviser in the sense that you are referring. I sub­scribe fully to that thought and that is my view. It would certainly be a remote possibility that it would occur. 
Senator GRIFFIN. I appreciate that. The doctrine of separation of powers is a very important part of our Government, and I think those appointed to the Supreme Court should exercise great restraint in the temptation that might be offered from time to time to breach that line. 
I have no further questions, Mr. Chairman. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Burdick. 
Senator BURDICK. Mr. Chairman. 
I also welcome you to the committee. 
We don't enjoy the privilege of the separation of duties here in the Senate. We have more than our share of duties and as a result I missed the first part of this session. 
I was interested in what Senator Scott had to say in asking you about the stare decisis. I know that yesterday you said the Supreme Court was not a continuing constitutional convention. To what extent has the decision been made to form a firm body of law, in your opin­ion ? A firm body of the law ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Will you repeat your question? I am not sure I understand. 
Senator BURDICK. TO what extent, based upon the Constitution and based upon the decisions rendered upon the Constitution, has the law been firmly established in your opinion, so that in certain areas, such as in the Brovm case and other cases, this is the rule of law today ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I am hesitating only because that obviously is a very difficult question to answer. I really could answer it best, I be­lieve, by repeating what I said yesterday, and I think it pretty well covers it. 
There is certainly an area, inevitably, where a judge, no matter how much he knows that he is not sitting for the purpose of rewriting the Constitution, must decide the case. In individual cases and contro­versies that arise under the individual facts and circumstances of a particular case, there just may well be, and frequently is, Senator Burdick, a gap in the statutes, a hiatus of sorts, where the judicial function and the judicial process inevitably requires the gap to be filled, because action has to be taken and rights determined. It is a new situation. It is a different situation. It is a many splendored thing in this regard. Therefore, I cannot unequivocably, flatly respond by saying that this is forever more established and nailed to the wall as the law of the land and we will never look at it again. And this is not. It is open to inspection. 
The Nation itself is in such a process of change, constant change. We all, not only people change, but conditions change. Our society itself has absolutely changed in some aspects since the adoption of the Constitution. Yet it has been a marvelous instrument that has allowed us to live and to breathe under it and to make progress under it. Hope­fully, we will continue this progress for another 200 years. 
I am not trying to give you a broad speech on this subject because I don't know any other way to answer it than that. I hope I am being responsive. 
Senator BURDICK. DO you give any particular weight to the type of decisions, let us say unanimous decision as against the 6-3 decision, or a 5-4 decision? Do you give it any quantitative weight? 
Judge CARSWELL. I think any judge recognizes that a 5-4 decision isn't quite as solid as a 9-0 in any context. It is the law, it states the law, but we obviously recognize that there is an area of great dissen­tion and controversy on that particular point, whatever it may be. That would be a factor, yes, sir. I think I would have to answer" that yes. 
Senator BURDICK. In such areas as covered by the Brown decision and some other areas, at the present time, at least, in your opinion, the law is pretty well set in that area. 
Judge CARSWELL. I don't think there is any question about it. 
Senator BURDICK. That is all. 
The CHAIRMAN. Any further questions? 
Senator ERVIN. Maybe I could make an observation that might shed some light on when a judge has to fill in what Justice Cardozo called the indecisiveness of the law in his little book on the judicial process. When I had the privilege of serving on the North Carolina Supreme Court, we had on one conference two cases for considera­tion. One involved the will of a virtually illiterate woman who was like Maud's Mother in that her nouns and verbs didn't agree. When she had a verb, she didn't have a subject, and when she had a subject, she didn't have a verb. Justice Denny, one of my colleagues, wrote an opinion clarifying the will, and I wrote a dissent and I maintained that it was a very good will he had made for the lady but that he made it after her death. 
At the same time, I had written an opinion for consideration at the same conference interpreting a provision of our workmen's com­pensation law. There the legislature had done about like the woman did in writing the will. Where they had a subject, they didn't have a predicate, and where they had a predicate, they didn't have the subject. And I had to ascertain the legislative intent. So I wrote an opinion making clear that which the legislature had made very am­biguous. And since both Judge Denny and myself had tendered opin­ions in the will case, the court had to vote which one it was going to adopt. So four of them voted to adopt Judge Denny's and three of them voted to adopt mine which made mine the dissenting opin­ion. I thereupon told Judge Denny that when this conference adjourns, I am going to tack up a sign on your office door. 
He said, What are you going to say? 
I am going to say, "post mortem wills a specialty." 
Then Judge Denny said, If you do that, I am going to tack up a sign on your office door, and my sign is going to say "legislative repair shop now open for business." 
The CHAIRMAN. Any further questions ? 
Senator ERVIN. I have one question somewhat brought to mind by Senator Burdick's question. 
I have thought several times of that question myself, as to what decisions you are going to accept as bad ones, the interpretations of the Constitution or the statute? The best rule I have ever found to guide me was one that was stated by Judge Learned Hand. He was speaking at a memorial service for one of his colleagues to the Circuit Court bench of Judge Thomas Swann. He said that Judge Thomas Swann had devised this rule for his own guidance, that he should always accept the previous decision and never overrule it unless he reached the conclusion that the decision was untenable when it was made. And he said Judge Thomas Swann also said that even in cases like that, he was very reluctant to overrule the decision if a very solid foundation of case law had been based on that decision. In that case, he thought it was well to leave it to the legislative power to correct the law. 
I think Justice Brandeis entertained that view, because he says it was sometimes better for the law to be settled than for it to be settled right, because a law must have stability. It must have stability if it is going to furnish worthwhile rules for the guidance of the conduct of the people and the conduct of the court. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bayh ? Senator BATH. Judge, you have been very patient. I wanted to talk about this en bane opinion again. I don't want to belabor that 
case. I am unfamiliar with the en bane procedure, never having had the privilege of sitting on the bench. And I don't want to put words in your mouth. But is the effect of an en bane decision in which all of— 
Judge CARSWELL. En bane decision or en bane request for an en bane hearing ? 
Senator BAYH. Let's say the effect of the refusal to hear en bane, which I understand was what this was. Is the effect of that to sustain the decision of the panel ? 
Judge CARSWELL. On that particular case and those particular facts, that is true. Senator BAYH. And the interpretation of the particular law in question ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir; to sustain the majority of the court that rendered that opinion. Although in that particular case, I was not on the panel that wrote the opinion or heard the arguments. I don't disassociate myself from it because I voted with the majority of the court to deny the petition for rehearing. Obviously, if you were dis­turbed about it, you would have voted to hear some more about it. The majority of the court wasn't that disturbed about it and did not so vote. I didn't mean to leave any other impression with you about that. There is no question about that. 
Senator BAYH. Obviously, a person doesn't make that decision lightly. You have a chance to Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I hope I don't make these decisions lightly in any regard. It is a busy court, extremely busy. 
Senator BAYH. I don't want to put too much significance on that particular policy or that particular procedure. That is why I want to make absolutely certain what we are involved in. I brought it to your attention that some concern had been expressed to me earlier when we first visited the day before yesterday. The Senator from Kentucky brings it up again today. I want to make absolutely sure what the effect of that vote up or down was or would be. 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, I think I speak for everybody on this commit­tee when we hope to be able to have a chance to vote for you. Yesterday I was assuming you would be confirmed. The big problem is this 1948 statement, which I think you recognized as a problem, because you repudiated it rather unequivocally. 
Judge CARSWELL. I hope so. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, I asked you yesterday at what time your thoughts began to change and I think you suggested that this was a sort of process. I thought the answer yesterday was a very good one. I think part of this process causes us to look with a great deal of par­ticularity at each step along the way at which a change might be in evidence. That is why, yesterday, two or three of the members of the committee asked questions rather repeatedly, I think, as I look back over the record, relative to this country club situation. I would like to iust make sure where we stand on that. 
Judge CARSWELL. All right. 
Senator BAYH. Can you repeat very briefly, not to belabor this, but repeat verv briefly your involvement in and participation in that club ? As I recall, you said a fellow named Smith brought this to your at­tention. He is the only one you talked to ? 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bayh, we have here Mr. Proctor, who has all the records. I am going to put him on following the judge's testimony. 
Senator BAYH. I think that is fine. Now, could we just have this 
answer. 
The CHAIRMAN. Yes. 
Judge CARSWELL. Let me get one thing straight about that. I said then and I say now that the only conversation I recall having had with any human being about this incident in 1956 is they wanted money to get a club; $100 was paid. I signed a paper of some sort that desig­nated me as—I don't recall. The papers speak for themselves, whatever it was designated was there. I never attended a meeting with a human being about that matter. That is all there was to it. I recall that I thought, trying to be completely candid, that I had talked to a friend of mine in Tallahassee, whose name is Julian Vareen Smith. There has been some confusion. Somebody else thought it was Julian C. Smith. There are two of them in Tallahassee. 
The CHAIRMAN. DO you know both of them? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, but I know Julian C. Smith casually and I know Julian Vareen Smith quite well. He is the one I think with whom I had a conversation. I don't even remember talking to him since this has come up. I don't intend to. That is all there was to it. 
This was a defunct outfit that went out of business. I now under­stand, I have been given to understand, by the papers brought up here from Tallahassee for the full inspection of this committee. We never functioned at all. This group went defunct and that is why I got my $76—not $75, but $76—back m February 1 of the next year. The corpo­ration that actually took title to that property was an entirely dif­ferent corporation that I never was on in any way at all. I think the records will show that I was a member of that club only actually for 3 years, 1963 to 1966, when my boys wanted to play golf and we even dropped out of that because it was too high a stipend; they would rather pay the greens fee than the full club dues and we used the club very sparingly. 
Senator BAYH. Yesterday, as I recall, you said the purpose of this, to your knowledge, was to build a clubhouse ? Judge CARSWELL. Clubhouse or club facilities. I suppose they had in mind a swimming pool, tennis courts, the usual things. Senator BAYH. Since you have looked at the documents, I sup-Judge CARSWELL. Senator, I have not looked at the documents. I didn't mean to leave that impression with you. The documents speak for themselves. I couldn't begin to tell you what the documents say. 
Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Nominee, I think the document speaks for itself in terms of the incorporation of a club, a private club. Given the set of circumstances, the fact that there were fears of closing down of recreational facilities in that community at that time because of various integration orders, I suppose the point that Senator Bayh is getting to and some of us asked you yesterday is whether the for­mation of this club had as its own purpose to be a private club which would, in fact, exclude blacks. The point that I think he was men­tioning and driving at, and Senator Hart talked to, and I did in terms of questions, is whether, in fact, you were just contributing 
$100 to repair of a wooden clubhouse, or whether in fact, this was 
an incorporation of a private club, the purpose of which was to avoid 
the various court orders which had required integration of municipal 
facilities. 
Now, I think this is really what, I suppose, is one of the basic ques­
tions which is of interest to some of the members and that we are 
looking for some response on. 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir, and I hope I have responded, Senator 
Kennedy. I state again, unequivocally and as flatly as I can, that 
I have never had any discussions with anyone, I never heard any dis­cussions about this. 
Senator BAYH. YOU had no personal knowledge that some of the 
incorporators might have had an intention to use this for that pur­
pose? 
Judge CARSWELL. I certainly could not speak for what anybody 
might have thought, Senator. I know that I positively didn't have any 
discussion about it at all. It was never mentioned to me. I didn't have 
it in mind, that is for sure. I can speak for that. 
Senator BAYH. Were there problems in Florida relative to the use 
of public facilities and having them moved into private areas 
Judge CARSWELL. AS far as I know, there were none there and then 
in this particular property that you are talking about. 
Senator BAYH. YOU weren't aware of other cases in Florida 
Judge CARSWELL. Oh, certainly, certainly. There were cases all 
over the country at that time, everywhere. Certainly I was aware of the problems, yes. But I am telling you that I had no discussion about it. It was never mentioned to me in this context, and the $100 I put in for that was not for any purpose of taking property for racial purposes or discriminatory purposes. 
Senator BAYH. YOU were aware that the Supreme Court had pre­viously, sometime before that, come down with an order prohibiting this type of thing? 
Judge CARSWELL. Yes, sir; I am aware of the decision of the Supreme Court. 
Senator BAYH. Well, I don't want to dwell on this at length, but I think we need to nail down that Judge Carswell has, after that one intemperate statement, been involved in a steady sequence of events which tend to repudiate it; and it concerns me, very frankly, for you incidentally to be involved at the time you were district attorney in the incorporation of a club at least some of the members of which have made public allegations that the purpose of this was to avoid the integration order which had been previously set down by the Supreme Court of the United States and which, 1 month after incorporation, was ordered relative to another court in Pensacola, in your own State. This concerns me. You had no knowledge of this Pensacola case, because it came down a month afterward. But one has to wonder if the district attorney wasn't aware that this activity was going on in the State of Florida. 
Judge CARSWELL. Certainly, I was aware, Senator, that these things were going on. But you will find, and I think the records will show— I have not examined them, but I am positive that I have never been any incorporator, director, whatever the language may be on there, I have never participated in any corporation that ever took any action with regard to anything. When that final incorporation was made, I was not any part of it at all. This was a purely defunct thing that went completely out of existence. 
Senator KENNEDY. It went out of existence, but the question, I think, comes down to whether you were a part of it when it went into existence. 
Judge CARSWELL. Not when it took any action, Senator. I think the record will have to speak for itself in this regard. 
Senator KENNEDY. When you become a subscriber, as the article says, a director and subscriber—I am reading right out of article 8 of the incorporation—it says "the name and post office address of each director and subscriber" the number of shares of stock, and then it lists a number of names, of which yours is one—did you have any idea that that private club was going to be open or closed? 
Judge CARSWELL. The matter was never discussed. 
Senator KENNEDY. What did you assume ? 
Judge CARSWELL. I didn't assume anything. I assumed that they wanted $100 to build a clubhouse and related facilities if we could do it. It didn't work, so I got out of it and—I did join the club in 1963 as a member. 
Senator KENNEDY. When you signed this, and you put up the money, and you became a subscriber, did you think it was possible for blacks to use that club or become a member? 
Judge CARSWELL. Sir, the matter was never discussed at all. 
Senator KENNEDY. What did you assume, not what was discussed? 
Judge CARSWELL. I didn't assume anything. I didn't assume any­thing at all. It was never mentioned. 
Senator KENNEDY. What was the practice at that time? You must have had some thought whether individuals whose skin was black could join that club or not ? 
Judge CARSWELL. Sir, the only time in my life I have been a member of a country club was a period of 1963 to 1966 anywhere. I have not been preoccupied with examining the country clubs' policies. I had nothing to do with it. I don't mean I wasn't aware of—there cer­tainly were many places in this country, not only in the South but many other areas, where there have been discriminatory practices. But this did not enter into anything whatever with this. 
Senator BAYH. Did you say 1963 to 1966 or 1953 to 1958 ? Judge CARSWELL. I said the only time I was a member of a country club anywhere, as far as I can recall, was 1963 to 1966. 
Senator BAYH. Then in the period during which you were a sub­scriber here, the matter of controversy, you were not a member of this ? Judge CARSWELL. We never had anything. It just died. It never was 
a country club. 
Senator BAYH. Let me respectfully suggest that the purpose for the establishment of this organization, whatever it may be called, was not to go defunct. It was to accomplish a purpose. 
Judge CARSWELL. I suppose that is a fair statement, Senator. 
Senator BAYH. That purpose was to build a clubhouse or run a golf course and in the processes not to have to integrate according to a decision handed down a short time before by the Supreme Court of the United States? 
Judge CARSWELL. That was not my purpose, it was never my pur­
pose, I repeat. 
Senator BAYH. I am sure of that. That is the way you look at it. The thing that concerns us is the reasonable question that others might doubt that that was the purpose for establishing the whole organiza­tion, particularly when you have the—I don't want to pursue this further right now. 
Judge CARSWELL. All right. 
Senator SCOTT. Would the Senator yield, because I think the amount 
in controversy here, $76 from $100, that is $24. I may say that is the 
biggest furor I have ever heard over $24 since the Indians sold 
Manhattan. 
Senator BAYH. May I say to the Senator from Pennsylvania, I have the greatest respect for him, and I don't know if he has followed this line of controversy 
Senator SCOTT. I have followed it and I am well aware the press deadline is noon. Senator BAYH. I am afraid that statement doesn't become the dis­tinguished Senator from Pennsylvania. Senator SCOTT. I am well aware it doesn't. I will be glad to withdraw the statement. 
Senator BAYH. That is all right. 
I might want to say I could care less about the $76.1 think we are talking about a broader principle. That is—I think the Senator knows what it is. Senator SCOTT. I should not have made the statement and I do withdraw it. 
Senator ERVIN. I will make a statement now perhaps which I should not make. I am intrigued by the questions by my distinguished friends from Indiana and Massachusetts. While Judge Carswell was a member of the country club during this period of 3 years, approxi­mately, the Congress of the United States passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964—not with my vote, because I was against it. That Civil Rights Act of 1964 provides in express terms that white people can have private dubs from which they exclude black people and black people can have private clubs from which they exclude white people. Every Member of the Senate who resides north of the Potomac River voted for that proposition. I didn't vote for it, but I think that was one of the sensible things in the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and my good friends from Indiana voted for it. 
Senator BAYH. That is correct. 
Senator ERVIN. NOW it came out in the press of Washington several years ago, when we had some questions like this asked concerning a nominee for the Supreme Court, that several sitting members of the Supreme Court of the United States were then members of private clubs in the city of Washington which restricted their membership to white people. 
Senator BAYH. Let me suggest, to put the record straight, if I may, that I think we are talking about apples and oranges. On one side we are talking about private clubs that are formed either to have white people in them^ or to have black people in them. On the other side, we have a public club which is assumed temporarily, at least, by a private organization, with the basic purpose of subverting the law •of the land, the 1964 act. 
Senator EKVIN. Those have been investigated. Newspapermen who have investigated this have stated in the press that the records show that the city of Tallahassee was running this club at a loss of $14,000 or $15,000 a year, that the city decided to close it down, that the prop­erty was sold by the city, just like they had the right and title to sell it and that, therefore, it was no longer a public club but a private one. So I think we are not talking about either apples or oranges, I think we are talking about green persimmons. 
Senator KENNEDY. The point of both questions is whether, as was stated by the Senator from North Carolina, the club was closed only because of financial reasons or was in fact closed and this corporation developed with the intention to avoid the law. Now, I think that no one is questioning whether the nominee has a right to membership in an exclusive club. That is not the question. It is this other question which I think is a legitimate line of inquiry. 
I have respected and added my applause for what the nominee said in reference to his 1948 statement. I think he was frank and forthright in his comment about his present view on this question. I suppose the only thing we have now to really look at is, as he said himself in his statement, that "there is nothing in my private life nor the public record of 17 years which could possibly indicate" he is a racist, and then it continues on. I suppose the question that comes up now is whether this recent statement is contradicted in terms of his relationship with this club. 1 think the only thing everyone of us in the Senate or this committee wants to do is get the full facts out on this question, and also the chance to review in some detail his decisions to see whether they are consistent with the 1948 statement or the 1970 statement. I think this is a perfectly legitimate line of inquiry, and hopefully, we will have an opportunity to spend the time, which I don't think many of us have had—I know I certainly haven't—in reviewing the decisions on this question. I think this is certainly the reason why I asked the question. 
The CHAIRMAN. Any further questions ? 
The CHAIRMAN. YOU may be excused, Judge. 
 

