Judge HAYNSWORTH. I am Clement Furman Haynsworth, Jr. I am now the chief judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. 
The CHAIRMAN. Judge, did you ever hear of a company named 
Carolina Vend-A-Matic? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I have heard a great deal of it, yes, sir. The CHAIRMAN. When was it organized ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. In 1950, Mr. Chairman. 
The CHAIRMAN. Who organized it? Pull that mike up a little, please. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Several members of my law firm and a busi­nessman who was a friend of ours. At the outset for a few months there were two others in it, too, but they quickly dropped out. Es­sentially, they were people in my law office and a businessman friend. 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, what was the nature of its business ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. At the outset it bought and placed machines to vend coffee, and they were placed in bus stations, post offices, a variety of locations like that. And they were vending coffee. 
The CHAIRMAN. Well, did it grow much in those early years ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, it did, and the rate of growth was increased and it began to grow very greatly when industrial plants began to turn to machines to dispense food to employees in industrial plants. And then it had a very tremendous expansion as did as far as I know all concerns in that particular business at that time. 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, when did Carolina Vend-A-Matic first re­ceive a contract from Deering Milliken Corp. ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I believe the first one was in Gayley Mill in 1952. They did have coffee machines in the Judson Mill prior to 1958, but I am not certain what date, what year they went into Judson Mill, but they were removed in 1958. 
The CHAIRMAN. HOW many mills does Deering Milliken have, or did they have in 1963 ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, again, I don't know. In the case in my court I believe it is mentioned they had something like 27 mills, but I am not certain of the number. 
The CHAIRMAN. Well, isn't it correct that they had in excess of 27 mills when you count the mills where they sold their goods and fi­nanced them, and, in fact, controlled them ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think so, sir, but I am—I don't know enough about it to say just the exact number that they did have. But my im­pression was it was 27 or more. 
The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Now, those 27 mills had 19,000 employees, did 
they not ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. SO, it appears; yes, sir. The CHAIRMAN. All right. Now, when did Carolina Vend-A-Matic 
get its second contract with Deering Milliken ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The second one would have Judson Mills if it was not the first. They had machines there which were removed in 1958. 
The CHAIRMAN. YOU don't remember what year ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know what year they went into Judson 
Mills. I do know they were removed in 1958. The CHAIRMAN. It was before 1957 ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. The CHAIRMAN. NOW, you were appointed U.S. circuit judge in 
1957, is that correct ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct, sir. The CHAIRMAN. And at that time Carolina Vend-A-Matic—and by 
the way, you owned a one-seventh interest in Carolina Vend-A-Matic ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, if no regard is had to one share, but ap­proximately one-seventh: yes, sir. 
The CHAIRMAN. YOU had machines in two of their 27 mills ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. The CHAIRMAN. And the next year after you became judge, the com­pany, Deering Milliken, had Carolina Vend-A-Matic remove the ma­chines from one of the mills ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. And in that same year more machines were installed in the Gayley Mill to dispense foods as well as coffee, in 1958, and I believe it was the same year they put one coffee machine and one candy machine in a very small little plant in Jonesville. 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, when was the case of Darlington Manufactur­ing Co. versus National Labor Relations Board argued ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. It was argued in June 1963. The CHAIRMAN. When was it decided ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. November, 1963. The CHAIRMAN. When did Carolina Vend-A-Matic receive its next 
contract from Deering Milliken ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It received one in the summer of 1963. As I recall, this began in late spring, the contract was made in the summer of 1963, in a brand new plant being built, Magnolia, and they re­ceived eight bids from eight companies in this line of business and on their appraisal of those bids they made an award to Vend-A-Matic. 
The CHAIRMAN. HOW many more—at what other times did you bid in 1963 to place machines with Deering Milliken plants? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. They did place bids for two more plants, Laurens Mill and Drayton Mill. Again, others put in bids, too, and they lost both of those. They got neither. 
The CHAIRMAN. In other words, from 1963 Carolina Vend-A-Matic 
received one plant of Deering Milliken and lost two ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct, sir. The CHAIRMAN. NOW, how did Deering Milliken let its bids ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, at the time I knew very little about 
that, both someone would put an invitation for bids to a number of concerns in the area and each of them would put in a proposal, and how they were appraised, I don't know the particulars, but they looked at the services they offered and the commissions that would be payable and a number of things like that to appraise the bids and their serv­ices and equipment. 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, Carolina Vend-A-Matic was requested to sub­mit a bid in December, 1963, after the decision of the Fourth Circuit in the Darlington case, is that correct ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir; Drayton Mills. The CHAIRMAN. NOW, you lost that? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. T3ie CHAIRMAN. Deering Milliken gave it to someone else ? Judge HAYNSWORTH, Yes, sir. The CHAIRMAN. AS I understand, of 19,000 employees you did vend­ing business with approximately 700 or slightly less than 700 em­ployees?
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I believe that is correct, sir. The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Now, what was the nature of your association with Carolina Vend-
A-Matic ? You owned roughly a seventh of the stock ? 
 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, that was the principal thing, sir. From the outset all the stockholders were directors, and I remain a director until 1963.1 may explain here when I went on the court in 1957 I was a director of a number of concerns. Most of them published financial statements including a list of directors and it was very widespread. I felt that a judge in my position should not remain a director of such a concern out of fear of the fact that somebody might attempt to influ­ence what I did as a judge by trying to throw business or favors to a concern of which I was a director, so I resigned from those. I did not resign as a director from two small concerns. One of them, Main Oak, which is a passive concern in which I own a small amount of stock and which owns two pieces of real estate under long-term lease. It has no active business at all. I retained on this board of directors because, again, it was very closely held. I had no reason to think that my interest as a stockholder or as a director was known outside this small group, and I felt no compulsion at that time to resign. 
However, in October 1963, the Judicial Conference of the United States moved by the fact that some judges elsewhere had remained on boards of banks and institutions of that sort, adopted a resolution in which they expressed the sense that no judge should serve as an officer or director of any concern conducted for profit. This was not a mandatory thing but in light of the way that the Judicial Confer­ence had expressed itself, I promptly resigned from the board of those two concerns. This was in October 1963. 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, what was your connection with the operation 
of Carolina Vend-A-Matic ? That was the question. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator The CHAIRMAN. Did you have anything to do with the preparing of 
bids or soliciting business for Carolina Vend-A-Matic? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Nothing whatever. The CHAIRMAN. Yes, sir. Then what was the nature of your Judge HAYNSWORTH. The only real service I rendered to them was in 
connection with financing, bank loans particularly in the years prior to 1957. In addition to that, I would attend directors meetings, from time to time—when I was there and I could—in which various things would be discussed. But my principal concern was with finance. 
The CHAIRMAN. Did you have any stock or any interest in Deering 
Milliken? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. The CHAIRMAN. Carolina Vend-A-Matic did business, a vending 
business, in three of its plants, for about 700, less than 700, out of 19,employees % Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. The CHAIRMAN. About what did that business total a year ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, the estimates are on a full year basis— 
a gross of about $100,000, gross receipts in these machines. The CHAIRMAN. Out of how much? How much business did Caro­lina Vend-A-Matic do ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. In 1963 its total gross was $3,100,000. The CHAIRMAN. Yes, sir. Then about what percent of its gross busi­ness did it do with Deering Milliken ?Judge HAYNSWORTH. Roughly 3 percent. 
The CHAIRMAN. Roughly 3 percent ? I think a judge has got to be in a position that he doesn't care who wins a case. I think that ought to be the test. Now did Deering Milliken throw you any business at any time? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir; they did not. And I think the record speaks for itself. They did not favor this concern in any way. The CHAIRMAN. What interest did you have in the outcome of the Darlington case ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, the only interest I had was that as a judge, sir, to see that the result was what I thought the correct one in law. As far as any financial interest is concerned, of course I had none, and the only way that I have been thought to have had any was if Deering Milliken knew of my financial interest and knowing of it sought to influence me by some special favor of the Carolina Vend-A-Matic. In the first place, the record shows they did not know. In the second place the record shows that they did it no favors. 
The CHAIRMAN. In fact, one man who let the contract said he had never heard of you, is that correct? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That he said, and that doesn't surprise me, sir. 
The CHAIRMAN. Yes, sir. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. But it was, the reason I moved to sell my stock as soon as I could, once it became known of my stock interest I thought I should divest myself of that, and I moved to do that as quickly as I could. 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, your stock in Carolina Vend-A-Matic, that was organized as just a paper corporation with nothing and you put up around $3,000 altogether, is that correct ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did and the remaining four, of course, too. But we started out with very little money. 
The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Now, you said you arranged bank financing. But how much of the obligations which were personally endorsed by you and the other stockholders amount to at different times ? I know that it varied. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, when two of them got concerned about their exposure to financial loss, as I recall endorsed bank loans had gotten in excess of something like $50,000. They were increased after that. They kept on growing, and in 1963, the total bank loans amounted to several hundreds of thousands, but not all of those were endorsed by that time. 
The CHAIRMAN. YOU say bank loans of several hundred thousand ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, but by 1963, they were not all endorsed. We were getting so that it could stand on its own credit and had some credit on its own. 
The CHAIRMAN. About how many vending machines, about how many plants did Carolina Venda-A-Matic have machines in ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. In the record is a copy of the proposal they made to Drayton Mills in December 1963. In that is a list of 46,1 be­lieve, industrial plants in which it provided full vending service. 
The CHAIRMAN. Forty-six. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Forty-six. 
The CHAIRMAN. And you had only three in Deering Milliken of its 27 and one of them was a plant that had about 50 employees, is that 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Of course, it is not in this list of 46 be­cause that was not a full vending service. So there are only two plants in the list of 46. 
The CHAIRMAN. Senator McClellan. Senator MCCLELLAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have taken occasion to review some, some 12 to 15, of the important 
court decisions in which you participated. Later I may want to ask you some few questions about one or two of those decisions. But because the other issue has been brought to the front, been focused on here this morning, I will interrogate you about it, the conflict of interest ques­tion that has been raised. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. But in examining these decisions I cannot say that I agree with every ruling that you made. And I don't think I have been able to detect that they show a trend of a philosophy that is biased or prejudiced in any direction with respect to civil rights cases or labor cases. However, others might disagree. But I have read them with a view of determining whether there was apparently a fixed or ingrained philosophy that you entertained that might cause you to be biased or prejudiced in cases of any kind. I do not at the moment find it, although I might not agree with all of your decisions and later may wish to ask you some questions about them. 
Now, with respect to this conflict of interest, and I will try to be brief because there are other colleagues here who would like to ask some questions before we have to recess at 12 o'clock—and I just want to be very brief in deference to them so they can have an opportunity— let me ask you about this Carolina Venda-A-Matic company. Did it ever have a case in your court ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. Never at any time did it have litigation Judge HAYNSWORTH. None that I know of, no. Senator MCCLELLAN (continuing). That came before you? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, no. No, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. And at the time that you went on the court 
this was still a small company, closely held company between you and your former law associates, partners and one or two business friends, am I correct? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. At that time, could you anticipate or foresee 
any probability of this company having litigation in your court? Judge HAYNSWORTH. None whatever. Senator MCCLELLAN. And in fact it has never had? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. NOW, with respect to this Darlington—is that 
the name of it ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. Darlington Mills v. NLRB Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator MCCLELLAN (continuing). How many times was that case 
before your court in one form or another? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Three times. Senator MCCLELLAN. NOW, if I am correct—if I am not, you correct 
me, I am sure others will—on the issues that came before you in the three times that case was before your court is it correct to say that in two of those instances your ruling was apparently favorable or was favorable to the labor side of the issue rather than to the manage­ment side ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, in the first one, the Board had remanded 
the case for rehearings two or three times. Senator MCCLELLAN. Yes. Judge HAYNSWORTH. And an injunction was sought to prevent one 
more remand. And in that case, we held the Board could remand it to get specific information which it said it required. To that extent agreed with the Board and the Union. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Well, that was on labor side of the issue. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. But we did say that there should not be a broad, that there will have been enough hearings so that there should not be a broad remand beyond a search for the specific information which the Board said it would like. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. YOU restricted somewhat Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator MCCLELLAN (continuing). The scope of the further 
considerations? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. But at least there was a reversal of the lower 
court? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. All right. Now, the next one, proceed with it. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, ihc next one of course was the one there 
is all this talk about now in which we refused to enforce the Board's order which found that an unfair labor practice had been worked on the basis of coercion of the employees of that mill that was closed down. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. NOW, you reversed it and sent it back for 
further proceedings, is that right ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, we refused enforcement at that time, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. All right. Judge HAYNSWORTH. And this was when an appeal went to the 
U.S. Supreme Court. And I may say here much has been said in the press that my position at the time was wrong. And of course if I did anything wrong in sitting, the fact the result was right would not make my sitting right as Martin Mankin thought when he sought to defend himself on the ground that the results were correct in law. But I think from the point of view of the implication it might be worth a note that the Supreme Court held that on the record we had before us we were correct, we should not have enforced the order. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Should not have what? Judge HAYNSWORTH. We should not have enforced the order, just 
exactly what the court did. Senator MCCLELLAN. Yes. Judge HAYNSWORTH. But the Supreme Court said there was a theory 
on which enforcement might, the same result might be reached, if in fact the purpose of the closing of that mill was to coerce employees elsewhere and it had that effect, then an unfair labor practice would have been made out. But it said the Board did not inquire into this, and 
34-561—69 they had not, there are no findings in the record which will support a conclusion that the closing had that purpose and that effect. So there was a remand to the Board for another factual inquiry to see if there was a basis upon which the same result could be reached. 
But the Supreme Court agreed with us that on the record we had and on the contentions that were made in my court we were correct in declining enforcement of the Board's order. 
I simply mention that because it has been widely suggested in the press because the Supreme Court did remand it that that proved that I was wrong when I concurred in Judge Bryan's opinion in the first place. And I suggest the Supreme Court agreed with us. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. All right. Did the matter come before you a third time on an issue of an injunction ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It did. It went to the Board and the Board thereupon found on the basis of the opinion written by the Supreme Court that the closing was influenced by a purpose to coerce employees in remaining plants and that it had that effect, and so they again found an unfair labor practice. And the case again came before my court and I joined with, not the whole court because there were two dissents but I was with the ones who held that the order itself should be enforced. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. And as a result of that was the injunction dissolved? There was an injunction that had been issued, had there not? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, that had gone by earlier when the re­mand was held, and pursuant to the order we entered there were hear­ings and that order served its purpose and was, and was completely out when the 
Senator MCCLELLAN. I see. Let me ask you; did the Carolina Vend-
A-Matic Co. have any interest whatsoever in that litigation? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. Did an order, could an order, any order that 
was made in any of these cases affect it either directly or indirectly 
in anyway whatsoever? Judge HAYNSWORTH. It did not Senator MCCLELLAN. Did you profit personally by reason of the 
stock you held in Carolina Vend-A-Matic ? Did you profit in any sense, in any degree whatsoever by reason of any decision or court action that was, came before your court 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did not. Senator MCCLELLAN (continuing). With respect to Deering Milli­
ken—is that right—and Darlington Mills? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did not. Senator MCCLELLAN. I notice in the questions in response to Sena­tor Eastland you said that your company had machines, vending machines in plants serving 700 employees of the Deering Milliken Co.; is that right? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator MCCLELLAN. And it has many subsidiaries? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. Out of a total employment of 19,000? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct, sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. And if a question about substantialness here would arise as to whether 700 is a substantial amount of 19,000, if you put it on the basis of employees being served, assuming that there is some conflict of interest—it could not be if there were not—if you assumed there were it would be in that relationship of 700 to 19,000, is that correct? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. And on the basis of money involved from that 700, I believe you said there was a gross amount of income of about $100,000? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. What would be the gross profit out of that $100,000 ? That is the gross income. Now what would be the profit, net profit out of that? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I don't know. The commission would have been payable to approximately—— 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Sir? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Commissions would have been payable of ap­proximately 10 percent, I believe, and the remaining 90 percent, what the gross would be vary so much with the numbers of machines you had to put in a particular place. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. I figure you make about a 10-percent profit. Judge HAYNSWOTRH. Oh, no, I don't think so, not on these, particu­larly in the last one. They had 16 machines serving 350 people. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Well, let us see. I am trying to find out of this $100,000 that was gross that came from that source to your company in which you had stock, how much of that would be transmitted into net profit at the end of the year for your company? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I can only guess at that because I really-
Senator MCCLELLAN. Well, there is some way of determining it. What was your overall profit ? And then you divide this by the amount of total income. There is a way of arriving at it. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Overall I expect it was close to approximately 
10 percent, but I don't know. I have not tried to compute it. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Well, I think you ought to compute that and let the record show at this point what out of that $100,000—the only thing that could possibly be in controversy here would be that $100,000. That is all you got out of the machines, your company got out of the machines that were in the Deering Millikin plants or its sub­sidiaries, is that correct? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. And what would be your share of the net 
profits, what stock, related to the amount of stock that you owned. 
Now, what would be your share of the net profits? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. One-seventh of whatever they were. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Your share would be one-seventh of the net 
after all operating expenses ?
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. In other words, if they declared a dividend on 
the profits, yours would be one-seventh of that? 
The CHAIRMAN. Did you rebate Deering Milliken anything? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. They were paid a commission on Magnolia and Gayley, and the small installation in Jonesville. I doubt if they were, but I don't know, sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. NOW, then, your total gross income I believe you said was $3 million, from all of the company's operations, was $3 million? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. $100,000. The statement is in the record, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. All right. I am just analyzing the situation 
here. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Sure. Senator MCCLELLAN. Let's see how great a conflict of interest you 
might have had here, if it were substantial or not, if any at all? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. NOW, your company did not have any litiga­tion Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN (continuing). So it couldn't have had any 
interest. So if there was conflict at all, it was from an indirect source, is that right? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. I don't think it was there either but 
Senator MCCLELLAN. "Well, I understand, but there cannot be any charge, there isn't any charge here that you decided a case for your company ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. All right. It is through some indirect applica­tion of economic factors that, if any at all, you would have to be charged with conflict of interest. And now the question is, I am try­ing to ascertain whether if at the worst, assuming it is true, whether it is substantial and, if so, how substantial. So we have it down to where you would have actually one-seventh of whatever the net profit is out of $100,000 gross 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. Senator MOCLELLAN (continuing). Am I correct? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. Senator MCCLELLAN. And I think you or your company or some­
body, your auditors ought to be able to figure this out and we ought to have that for the record. Now, that is the most—from what we have heard here so far and from what I understand is involved here— that is the most that you could have at all profited from this whole thing.
Well, you can calculate it later and submit it for the record. 
Is there any other instances—do you know of any other charges or accusation since your appointment which have come up whereby you are charged with any conflict of interest in your services as a judge? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. YOU know of no other? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. This is all I have heard of. Well, I will yield. I have another thought, but I will yield for the 
present so the others may have an opportunity. But I want to interro­gate you further, and I would like for you to make this calculation and put it in the record here of what the worst is if there is any truth 
or relationship or validity in this charge at all. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, gentlemen, we are going to recess at 12 o'clock and come back at 2:30. 
Senator ERVIN. Judge, so far as I can recall I have never had any personal acquaintance with you. However, I happen to have prac­ticed law in the fourth circuit and it was necessary for me to keep abreast of the decisions of the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. After I ceased to practice law and came to the Senate my legal curiosity prompted me to continue that practice. And so over the years I have been familiar with the decisions of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit and have read your opinions in the cases it has decided. I am compelled to say that as a lawyer, I have reached the honest, and abiding conviction from reading your opinions that you have discharged your duties as a member of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit with what Edmund Burke called "the cold neutrality of the impartial judge." I know of no higher tribute that can be paid to any occupant of a judicial once. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Thank you very much, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. I would like to make one thing plain. That is, the way in which factual decisions are made in the courts and the way in which factual decisions are made by the National Labor Relations Board are based upon different legal principles; are they not? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. The fact as found by the Board the court must, accept if there is support in the record for them. 
Senator ERVIN. In others words, courts in making factual decisions are required by law to base those decisions on what we lawyers ordi­narily call the greater weight of the evidence? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. However, the National Labor Relations Board is the sole judge of the evidence and any decision which it makes on a question of fact cannot be reviewed by the courts except upon the alle­gation that it is not supported by substantial evidence? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. Often I, as a lawyer, have wondered what is sub­stantial evidence—whether it is 5 or 10 percent or what of the evi­dence. But whatever it may be, if it be, say, 5 percent and the Na­tional Labor Relations Board basis a finding of fact on that 5 per­cent of the evidence and the finding of fact is inconsistent with 95 per­cent of the evidence, the courts are bound by it; are they not? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. They are. 
Senator ERVIN. SO when the court approves the finding of the NLRB, it doesn't necessarily do so on the basis that it is the proper finding on the evidence but because the court is bound by the statute giving the National Labor Relations Board the power to find the facts ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, we would accept the findings of the Board whether we think we would have found the facts the same way or not. 
Senator ERVIN. Yes. In other words, courts in many cases do actually support and uphold and implement the findings of the National Labor Relations Board notwithstanding the fact that the court itself believes those facts as found by the National Labor Relations Board were erroneously found? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes. 
Senator ERVIN. NOW, first, the mill which gives its name to the Dar­lington case was a mill which had been erected in Darlington, S.C., by the residents of that town back in 1888, as I recall. That was during the first year of the first administration of Grover Cleveland as President. 
Is it not true that there was a very serious question of fact and law in the Darlington case concerning whether Darlington was a separate and legal entity from the Deering Milliken chain or whether they were in fact and in law the same single employer? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes; this was one of the points as to whether or not the order could reach Milliken itself. 
Senator ERVIN. In other words, there were two fundamental ques­tions in that case. The first was whether Darlington, viewed as a sepa­rate legal entity wholly apart from the Deering Milliken Co., had a right to go completely and permanently out of business notwithstand­ing the advent of the union on the scene ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. 
Senator ERVIN. And the other point was whether or not Darlington constituted an integral part of the Deering Milliken chain and whether or not the fact that Darlington went out of business would be con­sidered a partial closing as distinguished from a complete closing of one of the integral parts of that chain? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This was true, though in the context in which it came up to the court the first time the claim was that the closing was coercive of the employees in that one plant. And the Supreme Court agreed. Whether it was a part of the larger chain or not, if that were the reason, there was no unfair labor practice. But if the purpose was and the effect was to coerce the employees in other plants, then an unfair labor practice would have been committed. 
Senator ERVIN. I know that to be true because I argued the Darling­ton case before the Supreme Court of the United States on one point and one point only. That is, I took the position that Darlington as a separate legal entity had an absolute right to go out of business perma­nently and completely regardless of whether its action in so doing was motivated by union animosity or any other factor. The Supreme Court held that to be sound law and to that extent affirmed the holding of the court of appeals in the 1963 case. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Indeed, yes, and it said on the record we had there was no warrant to conclude anything else. 
Senator ERVIN. This whole matter of the Darlington case arose in 1956 as a result of various economic factors and as a result of a union election in which the employees of that plant voted for the union 258 to 252, which was a six-vote margin. 
Now, then, the matter pended before the National Labor Relations Board from 1956, and it first came before the court of appeals not as a matter under the National Labor Relations Board, but on an injunc­tion proceeding 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator ERVIN (continuing). In 1961, which was 5 years later. At that time you wrote a unanimous opinion for the court of appeals, and 
the question involved there was whether or not the National Labor Relations Board had performed its legal duty to make a decision in the case within a reasonable period of time. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. NOW, Darlington and Deering Milliken had gone into the U.S. Circuit Court for the Middle District of North Carolina and had sued Reed Johnston, the regional director of the National Labor Relations Board from North Carolina, to enjoin him from carry­ing out an order of the National Labor Relations Board remanding the case to the trial examiner, Lloyd Bucannon, for the taking of further evidence. And they alleged in that case that the National Labor Rela­tions Board, by permitting this matter to drag from 1956 to 1961, or thereabouts, had failed to perform its statutory duty to decide the matter with reasonable dispatch. 
Now, in that case the union wanted this proceeding held, and you wrote the opinion in which you indicated a very strong case for the fact that they had not moved with reasonable dispatch. However you held, or rather the circuit court held in your opinion, that the union was entitled to have the matter reheard to a limited extent by the trial examiner. Actually, the decision limited the hearing as to certain matters which had arisen in connection with the merger of Deering Milliken with Cotwool Manufacturing Co. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. The district court had granted a broad injunction which would have foreclosed all hearings. We disagreed with that and said that the Board and the union were entitled to further hearings to produce the specific information it said it was lack­ing and that they needed. 
Senator ERVIN. SO the decision you wrote on that occasion for the unanimous court of appeals was at least a partial victory for the unions and a partial defeat for the textile plants ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, yes. The unions got the right to present the additional information that they said they required or wanted. 
Senator ERVIN. NOW, this hearing was had and later the National Labor Relations Board made a decision. The Board concluded two things in summary. The first was that the Darlington mill and the Deering Milliken chain were a single employer within the meaning of the National Labor Relations Act. Additionally, they said even if Darlington were a separate entity, that Darlington committed an unfair labor practice under the Labor Management Act by going out of business completely and permanently because it was motivated to some degree by the advent of the union. 
So the question then came up before the court of appeals and there was a divided decision, 3 to 2 written by Judge Bryan and being concurred in by Judge Boreman and by you, and a minority opinion being written by Judge Bell and being concurred in by Judge Sobeloff. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. And the court of appeals held in that case that, in effect, it was not necessary to pass upon the question whether Darling­ton and Deering Milliken were a single employer because Deering Milliken had a right to close that one mill completely and permanently, although it continued the operation of other mills ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. I think that is correct. 
The CHAIRMAN. Let us have order. 
Senator ERVIN. In other words, to get it right down, Judge Bryan said: To go out of business in toto or to discontinue it in part permanently at any time, we think was Darlington's absolute prerogative. The fundamental purpose of the National Labor Relations Act is to preserve and to protect the rights of both industry and labor so long as they are in the relationship of employer and employee. But the statutes' scope does not exceed that providence. It does not compel a person to become or remain an employee. It does not compel one to be­come or remain an employer. It may withdraw from that status with immunity, so long as the obligations of any employment contract have been met. 
Now, that case went to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court didn't reverse anything. They remanded the case. However, they sus­tained a point I argued totally, that viewing Darlington as a separate corporation, or separate legal entity, it had a right to go out of business entirely and completely for any reason including antiunion motives. They said, however, that the law would be otherwise if Darlington was a part of the Milliken chain, and the Milliken chain closed down Dar­lington for the purpose of chilling unionism in the other plants of the Milliken chain. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. And it had that effect. 
Senator ERVIN. Yes, they said it had to have that purpose and they had to reasonably see that would be the effect of it. So they remanded the case to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit with directions that the National Labor Relations Board should pass upon the question of purpose and effect and suggested that after that was done the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit would be able to pass upon the entire case and determine whether or not there was any substantial evidence to sustain the finding of the National Labor Rela­tions Board with respect to the employer relationship of Darlington and Deering Milliken. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. Then the National Labor Relations Board conducted further hearings and they found that the purpose and effect required by the Supreme Court decision did exist and they rendered their deci­sion. And the question came before the U.S. court of appeals as to whether it would be enforced. And the court of appeals sat en bane— that was in 1967,1 believe. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think that is correct, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. Before I get to that, though, the decisions of the National Labor Relations Board were in substance different from those of the trial examiner on the facts and the original decisions of the National Labor Relations Board was dissented from by members of the Board, Leedum and Rodgers, were they not? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The Board itself was split on this almost from the very outset; yes, sir.
Senator ERVIN. NOW, when the case came before the court of appeals in 1967, it was decided May 31, 1968, and the opinion was written by Judge Butsner and his opinion was concurred in by Judge Sobeloff, Winter, and Craven. Judge Bryan and Boreman dissented. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator ERVIN. And you wrote an opinion which concurred in part and dissented in part, as I construe it. Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO ; I simply concurred 
Senator ERVIN. Well, you concurred but you did not fully approve of the majority opinion in one limited respect. Now, the question there which the court decided in favor of the unions was whether there was substantial evidence to support the finding of the National Labor Rela­tions Board that Darlington was an integral part of the Milliken Deer­ing chain and that the Deering Milliken chain had closed Darlington with the purpose and the effect that the Supreme Court had said was necessary to sustain an unfair labor practice. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The Board so found, and I fully concurred in that. And if this contention had been before the court in 1963, there would have been no doubt about the result in my court then. We would have enforced the order. 
Senator ERVIN. Yes. Well, to go back to the 1963 opinion, was the not overwhelming weight of the decisions of the U.S. courts of appeal throughout the Nation in conformity with the opinion that Judge Bryan wrote at that time ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think it was, and I think the Supreme Court said it approved, too. 
Senator ERVIN. Yes. And the National Labor Relations Board con­ceded that there was not a single precedent to support its finding view­ing Darlington as a separate plant with no right to go out of business completely and purposely for union bias. 
Now, as a matter of fact, your concurring opinion in the 1967 case was on the side of the union, was it not ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes; I completely accepted the findings of the Board and on that basis ordered that Senator ERVIN. NOW, you expressed some misgivings about the result of the opinion on the minority Darlington stockholders ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. And I shared that misgiving. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir, because I thought that if the purpose was to gain some advantage for the single unit employer someplace else, the economic burden should follow them and not fall on the in­dependent stockholders who had nothing to with that at all. 
Senator ERVIN. In other words, the control of these companies was in the hands of what we call Deering Milliken and the decision in which you concurred was to the effect that they closed Darlington for the purpose of chilling unionism within the purview of the U.S. Supreme Court decision in their other plants ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. And the burden should fall to them and not on Darlington; yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. NOW, at that time, Darlington had 200 stockholders who had no interest whatever in any of the mills of the Deering Milli-ken chain. And the National Labor Relations Board itself conceded that there was a substantial interest to liquidate the mill and go out of business. 
The mill had been in bankruptcy at one time and been reorganized in 1937. It had run for years at a very low rate of return and it was losing $40,000, according to Judge Bryan's opinion, in the year in which it was liquidated and it stood to lose $240,000 in the next year as near as could be projected. They undertook the reorganization of their business by installing new machinery, and were in the process of carrying it out when the union appeared upon the scene and said if they were to choose the union that the mill could not carry out the various steps which an impartial engineering efficiency firm said were necessary to enable it to remain a viable economic entity. And so these 200 stockholders joined Milliken in voting to liquidate the mill. I think a very plausible case could be made for the proposition that since they had no interest in chilling unionism at any of the other mills that they ought not to have borne a part of the consequences of the unfair labor practice of those who were controlling the mill. And you expressed some misgivings on that point also. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. I wrote to state them. I thought the burden of the award should fall on the larger group and not on these independent stockholders who had no part in the purpose which the Supreme Court said was necessary to support the finding of an unfair labor practice. 
Senator ERVIN. AS a matter of fact, your concurring opinion that the entire burden resulting from the unfair labor practices found by the National Labor Relations Board should fall on Deering Milliken and no part of it should fall upon the independent minority stock­holders of Darlington indicates that you have a fine sense of justice and was eminently correct. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Thank you, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. TO my mind the results of the majority opinion is that they were going to confiscate the remaining interests of the inde­pendent 200 stockholders in the Darlington plant who had nothing to do with the Deering Milliken chain to help pay for the consequences of the established unfair labor practice. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to put in the record at this point the entire opinion of the court of appeals in the Darlington case. 
The CHAIRMAN". It will be admitted. 
The CHAIRMAN. We will recess now until 2:30. 
 
Senator ERVIN. Judge, there have been some writeups in the press indicating that the law involved in the Darlington case was only law relating to the textile industry. I will ask you if the law involved in the Darlington case did not have a direct relevance to every business conducted by an individual or by a private corporation or by a partnership which employed the services of other people and which affected to any degree interstate commerce. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes, sir. There is no special rule for textile concerns. 
Senator ERVIN. In other words, the law involved in this case was law which is applicable to every business having the necessary relation­ship to interstate commerce in the entire United States ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN- And I assert without fear of successful contradiction from any source that the opinion which Judge Bryan wrote in the 1903 case was in full accord with the overwhelming weight of authority in all of the circuit courts in the United States which had occasion to pass upon that question at that time. 
For example, the case of Jays Foods v. National Labor Relations Board (292 Fed 2d at page 317), decided July 25, 1961, said this on page 320: 
"Any employer"— and this case involved a question where an employer had gone partly our of business as a result of the advent of a union— Any employer has a right to consider objectively and independently the economic impact of unionization of his shop and to manage his business accord­ingly. Fundamentally, if he makes a change in operation because of reasonably anticipated increased costs, regardless of whether they are caused by or con­tributed to by the advent of a union or by some other factor, his action does not constitute discrimination within the provisions of Sections 8(a) (1), (2), (3> and (f>) —(1), (3) and (5) of the act. 
I intend to put in the record later a number of similar decisions of circuit courts. 
Now, when the case first came before the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, it came upon a ruling of the National Labor Relations Board substantially to this effect, that no matter how prime the economic circumstances confronting a businessman or a private corporation engaged in a business affecting interstate commerce may have been, the National Management Act denies to that businessman the right to go out of business permanently and completely if his deci­sion to do so is motivated in any degree by the prospect of increased costs arising out of the advent of a union. 
Was that not substantially the question that confronted the circuit court in the 1963 decision ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think so, sir. I think a majority of the Board may have gone a little beyond if a motive for penalizing them for entering a union entered it 
Senator ERVIN. And I don't ask you to comment on this but I make this assertion on my own behalf, that if that decision of the National Labor Relations Board had stood, every man that went into business in the United States, that is, a business affecting interstate commerce, would have had to stay in business until the last drop of economic blood was squeezed from him, if the advent of a union contributed to the eco­nomic impossibility of his remaining in business. 
I don't ask for any comment on that, but that is what I assert from that decision. I assert that you were all confronted with one of the most fundamental questions of freedom ever presented to any court in the United States. The Supreme Court of the United States, in part certainly, agreed with the decision that the majority of the Court made, because it held that when an employer loses his entire business, even if the liquidation is motivated by vindictiveness toward the union, such action is not an unfair labor practice. 
In other words, they said, the closing of an entire business, even though discriminatory, ends the employer-employee relationship. The force of such a closing is entirely spent as to that business when termi­nation of the enterprise takes place. 
I maintain that that was a correct interpretation of the National Labor Relations Act because it shows entirely that it was only intended to regulate the relationship between an employer and his employees as long as he was engaged in a business affecting interstate commerce. 
If the Congress had undertaken to enact into law what the National Labor Relations Board declared in its first decision, that a man could not go out of business completely and permanently, no matter what his economic conditions were, if he was induced to do so partly by reason of the advent of a union, it would have violated the Constitu­tion clearly. This is true because Congress can only regulate a man's action in respect to interstate commerce, while his action affects inter­state commerce. 
It would not only have done that, but it would have violated due process of the fifth amendment, because it would have constituted the taking of one man's property for the benefit of others. 
And so I think the decision was correct, and that was what you were confronted with the first time, in substance. 
So taking these cases it is charged by insinuation that you had some kind of a bias toward Deering Milliken's interests. I am going to have to say in plain North Carolina language, leaving aside all legal lan­guage, that if you did, you sure took a poor way to show it, because when the first case came before the Court of Appeals you wrote the opinion and you reversed, or modified, the decision of the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina in a way which was highly favorable to the ultimate success of the unions, because your ruling allowed them to present evidence before the National Labor Re­lations Board. This was of rather crucial importance with respect to the point upon which the case was finally decided in favor of the union, that is, a question of the control of Deering Milliken over these over textile plants. 
The second time the case came up you had agreed with the opinion of a man who in my book is one of the fairest and most able jurists of my generation. I refer to Judge Albert Bryan. You agreed to an opin­ion which was in harmony with the overwhelming weight of authority of all the Circuit Courts of Appeal in the United States which had passed on this subject. 
And when you came to the final case after the Supreme Court had sent it back and after the facts had changed, the picture of the issues had changed, you agreed to a judgment that was substantially evi­denced to support the findings of the National Labor Relations Board with respect to the single employee relationship and with respect to the purpose and intent which actuated the closing of the Darlington Mill. And you went far beyond any other judge in the case in saying that the entire burden of responsibility for the unfair labor practice established by the decision of the National Labor Relations Board should be placed upon Deering Milliken and none of it upon the minor­ity stockholders of the Darlington Corp. 
So I repeat, in North Carolina parlance, if you had any bias in favor of Deering Milliken, you sure did take a poor way to show it. 
I will have some other things later, but I don't want to postpone any of my other brethren from asking questions. 
I renew my statement that although I have never had the privilege of knowing you personally, I have read your opinions over the years and thev have left me with an abiding conviction that as a member of the Court of Appeals of the Fourth Circuit you have discharged your duties as a judge with the cold neutrality of the impartial judge. 
Thank you. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Thank you very much, sir. Senator ERVIN. I want to put all these court opinions in the record 
at this point. The CHAIRMAN. They will be admitted. Senator ERVIN. Including the decision of the Supreme Court of the 
United States. (The opinions referred to appear in the appendix.) The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hart. Senator HART. Mr. Chairman, I yield to Senator Bayh, who I un­derstand would like to make an inquiry. 
Senator BAYH. I only make the inquiry because Senator Ervin sug­gested that out of courtesy to some of the rest of us he would not pro­ceed with the rest of his questions, and I take the liberty of asking our chairman to ask our distinguished witness to be with us in the morning again so that we can pursue this. 
The CHAIRMAN. That has been done. He will be available tomorrow. 
Senator BAYH. I am sure that our jurist doesn't need any advance notice, but I think it is only fair to suggest there are three basic areas that I would like to pursue tomorrow, and I think they have been hashed and rehashed. You covered some of them, today, I would like to put them in proper perspective, one area being the law firm re­lationships. You touched on that briefly. 
Two. The Vend-A-Matic relationship, which was also touched on. 
And third, I hope we can get into the matter of just what responsi­bility you as a member of the U.S. Supreme Court, or indeed as a mem­ber of the Appellate Court, have to remove yourself from any ques­tion of doubt. 
It is a burden that is not an easy one to carry, but I think it is one 
that is in many people's minds right now. With that, Senator Hart, I appreciate your courtesy. Senator HART. I understand, Mr. Chairman, that Senator Tydings, 
who urged that we continue this afternoon, did so because of a heavy 
schedule tomorrow. Senator TYDINGS. That is right. Senator DODD. If we are going to sit tomorrow, I ask leave to yield 
now to Senator Tydings. Senator TYDINGS. I thank my colleague. Mr. Chairman, before addressing questions to Judge Haynsworth, 
let me make a brief statement. 
During my 5 years as a U.S. Senator I have been privileged often to participate in the Senate's constitutional function of advising and consenting to Presidential appointments to the Federal Bench. The men whose names have been placed before the Senate have held a wide range of philosophical, social, and political views. Their views have seldom been amenable to meaningful classification. For this 
reason, I do not believe that the Senate should ordinarily take upon 
itself the chore of attempting to define a judicial nominee's positions 
on substantive issues that may appear before the Supreme Court, 
nor do I believe that the Senate should seek to shape the Federal 
courts in its own political image. 
In considering those named by the President for the vacancies on 
the Federal district and circuit courts over the past 5 years, and in 
considering previous nominees to the Supreme Court, I have consist­ently adhered to that position that, barring some unusual situation, a 
man selected by the President for the Federal bench should be con­
firmed by the Senate if he has demonstrated a proper judicial tempera­ment, an intellectual capacity equal to the task set for him, and a character beyond reproach. 
In addition, I believe a nominee to the Supreme Court should sub­
scribe to a judicial philosophy which in general would contribute to 
the High Court's critical role in our system of government. At the 
same time, however, I have long believed that an individual Senator's 
agreement or disagreement with the views that he believes the nomi­nee holds on particular issues or his findings in particular cases should 
not be a controlling consideration on the issue of the nominee's con­firmation. 
Consequently, I will not make a final determination on the confirmation of the nominee before us based on the criticism that has been leveled at him for certain decisions he participated in as a judge of the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. I have reviewed his position in this and other cases and, not unexpectedly, have found that I disagree with many of his votes while agreeing with some others. I disagree with his dissent in Simkins v. Moses Cone Memorial Hospital. I believe with the majority of the court that there was sufficient State action involved in the hospital grants to dictate the application of the tenets of the 14th amendment. 
On the other hand, I applaud his opinion, and it was a brilliant opin­ion, in United States v. Chandler in which his court adopted the hu­mane and modern definition of insanity proposed by the American Law Institute. 
I disagree with his decisions, at least partially, in the Darlington Manufacturing Company case but applaud his position in Langford v. Gelston which enjoined unfounded nighttime police raids in ghetto areas in mv own city of Baltimore. 
In sum, if I had been sitting with Judge Haynsworth on the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals, I would have dissented from his position in some cases and joined with him in others. No doubt many of my sena­torial colleagues on this committee would view the same cases differ­ently, but such views would not in my opinion disqualify them from service on the Federal bench. 
I have had the privilege of knowing Judge Haynsworth well. As 
U.S. attorney for the district of Maryland, a State encompassed in the fourth circuit, I frequently had occasion to argue before his court. On some of those panels I believe he sat, although I am not certain. As a Senator from Maryland, I have consulted with him about matters of particular significance to the U.S. district court for the district of Maryland and on other subjects involving court reform. 
As Chairman of the Subcommittee on Improvements in Judicial Machinery, I have worked closely with Judge Haynsworth, a member of the Judicial Conference, on matters of significance to judicial reform to the entire Federal judicial system. 
I think I can say as a lawyer in the fourth circuit I found Judge Haynsworth, as a judge, to be thoughtful, fair and openminded, and as an administrator and because of my subcommittee chairman­ship I have become aware of the work of the chief judges of the sev­eral circuits, I have found him to be innovated and, indeed, dynamic. Under his leadership the fourth circuit has made significant strides in eliminating its backlog and expediting the flow of its judicial business. 
Now, following the nomination of Judge Haynsworth to the Su­preme Court, a number of questions have arisen regarding the judicial propriety of the judge's business connections with Carolina Vend-A-Matic, Inc. The allegations and innuendoes of judicial imprudence are threefold. First, there is the allegation that the judge should not have retained his interest in the corporation after he ascended the bench. Second, that Judge Haynsworth should have disqualified him­self from hearing the Darlington Manufacturing case because of Caro­lina Vend-A-Matic's business ties with Deering Milliken, Inc., a parent company of Darlington or at least a controlling factor in Darlington's business affairs. 
Finally, some maintain that Judge Haynsworth should have recused himself from hearing the case because of Carolina Vend-A-Matic's connection with a law firm retained by one of the litigants in the Darlington case. In fairness to Judge Haynsworth, the Senate and the Court, the hearing record should reflect in full detail the facts underlying these matters. 
And, Judge Haynsworth, because of my desire to have all the facts regarding this matter brought to light, I will ask you a number of questions, some of which you have covered in part in your statements and answers to questions propounded by members of the committee. 
Let me ask you first, Judge Haynsworth, while you were on the Federal bench did you ever receive any compensation as an officer of Carolina Vend-A-Matic, did you ever receive any compensation as an officer or trustee of any subsidiary of Carolina Vend-A-Matic or of any retirement fund set up or controlled by Carolina Vend-A-Matic? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir; I did not. I was—I was a trustee of a retirement fund that was set up a few years before it was sold, but I was, there was no compensation for what I did as such. I did receive director's fees. That was the only compensation I received. 
Senator TYDINGS. The extent of your financial interest was your shareholdings or the stock 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. sir. 
Senator TYDINGS (continuing). Which you have already enumerated to this committee ? 
Now, in your response to the letter which Senator Hart and I sub­mitted to the chairman you stated that you met informally with the directors at a luncheon each week. 
I wonder whether you would be kind enough to outline to the com­mittee what duties you performed for Carolina Vend-A-Matic both at 
these luncheon meetings or at any other time while you were on the Federal bench? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. First, let me say in the earlier history before I went on the bench my attendance at these directors' weekly lunch­eons, meetings were very infrequent. After I came on the Court, I think perhaps they were more frequent, because when I was in Greenville and not in Richmond, these were friends of mine, and it was a pleasant experience for me to meet with them at lunch. 
The meetings there were very informal. We were friends. We talked about many things besides Vend-A-Matic business. If there was any­thing to talk about, of course we did. 
My particular interest, as I attempted to indicate, sir, was in its financing and its bank loans. And the only service that I rendered aside from general consultation at some of these weekly meetings was arranging for and keeping a watchful eye upon its finances. 
Senator TYDINGS. In relation to its financing, I think you stated in response to a question of either Senator McClellan or Senator Eastland that in addition to your initial investment in Carolina Vend-A-Matic you personally were liable on some notes for money borrowed to get the business started. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator TYDINGS. YOU indicated, I think, that the liability was around $100,000. I wonder if you could give us just for the record, either now or later, the exact amount of your liability. 
Judge HAYNESWORTH. Senator, I don't know. I could perhaps from the bank find out the extent to which they were endorsed. I know when the two stockholders dropped out they got concerned when the amount of those loans passed $50,000. The rest of us were not concerned and we wanted to go, and did go, on. 
From the financial statements that I have filed—I don't have them in front of me now—these notes got up to approximately $300,000 in 1963, but by that time I also know that we were getting some credit without endorsement. But now—but I can't offhand break down the $300,000. 
Senator TYDINGS. SO your initial investment was more than the $2,300. There was also liability on some substantial notes. Judge HAYNSWORTH. If it had gone bad, my losses would have been a great deal more than the cash I put up, yes. 
Senator TYDINGS. NOW, did you at any time ever directly or in­directly contact any officer, director or employee of Deering Milliken to obtain vending machine contracts for Carolina Vend-A-Matic? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did not, never. 
Senator TYDINGS. Did you ever make any telephone calls 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Never. 
Senator TYDINGS (continuing). To any officer of Deering Milliken to obtain business for Carolina Vend-A-Matic? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Never. Senator TYDINGS. Did anybody in your family ever make any tele­phone calls to any such officer or director? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Never. 
Senator TYDINGS. AS a part of your work, or as a part of your asso­ciation with Carolina Vend-A-Matic did you formally or informally seek to obtain business for Carolina Vend-A-Matic ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Never. I did not. This was not a matter of my interest, and I felt that it, what it had to offer should be sought on the basis of its own merit and that that's the way it should ac­quire whatever business it got. 
Senator TYDINGS. Did you receive director's fees for the luncheons, the directors' meetings, you attended of Carolina Vend-A-Matic? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did from the time it began to pay such fees, which was not at the outset. And this will show in my income tax returns, when I began to receive such fees. But at a time around 1954 or 1955 it did begin to pay directors' fees and from that time on I received them. 
Senator TYDINGS. DO you recall the highest director's fees, or what your director's fees were at the highest time ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. They were not, they were not large. And again, I don't have my returns in front of me, but I think they were, I would say they were modest. 
Senator Senator TYDINGS. Well, you can supply that report for the record. Judge HAYNSWORTH. All right, sir. Senator TYDINGS. I won't Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think I can find it. Senator, in 1963 the fees were more than earlier years. This was the 
last—well, no, I resigned—that year I reported $2,600 in director's fees. Senator TYDINGS. Right. Were you involved Judge HAYNSWORTH. I can tell you what it was in 1962, if you 
would wish, because Senator TYDINGS. That was the highest, wasn't it, the $2,600? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Let me check and be sure. Senator TYDINGS. All right. Judge HAYNSWORTH. I am sorry to fumble for this, but these are 
hard for me to make out. Senator TYDINGS. Judge Haynsworth, when was the last time you attended a directors' meeting ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I don't know. It was some time in the fall of 1963. I submitted the letter on October 15th, and it was some time prior to that. 
Senator TYDINGS. YOU attended no directors' meetings after 1963? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, no, sir. Senator TYDINGS. AS I understand from your statement which you 
submitted and a letter, you resigned as a director as a result of the di­rective or the rule which was adopted by the Judicial Conference of the United States ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did, sir. 
Senator TYDINGS. Were you involved in obtaining financing or lines of bank credit for Carolina Vend-A-Matic after you became a judge on the fourth circuit? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, if I was at all, it was to a very small extent. It was about that time we secured the services of Mr. Wade Dennis, and after he came in he handled all such relations with the bank. 
Senator TYDINGS. At the time you participated in hearing and decid­ing the Darlington Manufacturing Co. case, were you aware of Caro­lina Vand-A-Matic's business connections with Deering Milliken, Inc. ? And if you were, will you tell the committee what the extent of your knowledge was of these business ties ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, it's not easy to recall now what pre­cisely one knew or did not know in the summer and early fall of 1963 when just after that I went into it in great detail. 
I again say I knew precious little about the locations of the vending machines. I wasn't particularly concerned with where they were. And I cannot say that I had not heard that we had machines in any one of these three plants. I do not know that I heard they were in any. And if I heard they were in any, I don't know that I would have known that they were related to Deering Milliken. 
But I certainly, if I had been asked, I knew that we had machines in a miscellany of plants and if I had been asked I certainly would have responded, we might have some at least in some plants related to that concern. But I had no consciousness of what I later found out all the facts to be. 
Senator TYDINGS. In your letter to Senator Eastland in response to Senator Hart's and my queries, you indicate that in the fall of 1963 Carolina Vend-A-Matic had machines dispensing coffee, cold drinks, and candy in approximately 46 locations. Is that correct? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. There were plants where they had what we referred to as full line vending, where they have hot and cold foods. Of course, they had coffee machines and things of that sort in a variety of 
Senator TYDINGS. In more than that? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH (continuing). Place. Oh, yes. 
Senator TYDINGS. In more than 46 ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes, sir. They were the 46 plants where they had what they called full-vending service where substantially complete meals might be had. 
Senator TYDINGS. Notes from the board of directors' meetings of Carolina Vend-A-Matic indicate that in 1964, after you had given up your directorship and vice presidency in the company, that company leased certain property from you and other directors. What is the na­ture of that property and what income did you receive from this ? 
Mr. HAYNSWORTH. I did not understand what you 
Senator TYDINGS. Let me ask you this. According to the notes from the board of directors' meetings of Carolina Vend-A-Matic, I gather that after you had given up your directorship and position in the company, the company leased some real estate, some property from you and other directors. Is that a fact? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I don't know—when ARA wanted to acquire the stock, they did not wish to acquire a warehouse building that we had and some land that it was on. And because it did not wish it a distribution was made in kind of that land and warehouse build­ing and we then became its owners. 
Senator TYDINGS. Let me just read to you the note here from the minutes and then maybe it will refresh your recollection: 
At the weekly Board of Directors' meeting on April 6, 1964 resolution was passed that certain property be leased from C. F. Haynsworth, Jr. and some of the present Directors and Officers of the company. 
Do you recall what that property was? That was in April 1964. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This was just at the time the arrangement with ARA was concluded, and the only thing I can think of just now is I know this warehouse and land, the distribution of that was made in kind and we leased it back. 
Senator TYDINGS. In other words, part of the assets of the company at the time was certain real estate, and, as a part of the sale or the merger, you and others received a distribution of assets 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. In kind. Senator TYDINGS. In kind—and then you leased Judge HAYNSWORTH. We leased it back. Senator TYDINGS. DO you recall the income you received from the 
lease ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, the value of the distribution was re­ported as ordinary income, of course, and I believe it showed in my income tax return approximately $9,000, my interest in the real estate. The income, I know that is referred to in the financial statement that's attached to my second statement, sir, and I can tell you what that is. 
Senator COOK. Would the Senator yield ? Senator TYDINGS. Yes. Senator COOK. I think it is under "real estate" if I am correct, 
Judge. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator COOK. "1. Undivided interest in a tract of land upon which 
there is a warehouse" Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator COOK. Known as ARA warehouse from which my net tax­
able income in 1968 was $548. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator TYDINGS. Thank you. Judge, in a biographical sketch written by Mr. B. J. Phillips which 
appeared in the September 7th issue of the Washington Post it was reported that after World War II you were engaged, and let me quote his words, "In a lot of legal work behind the scenes which brought the large textile firms in from the North." 
The article also reports that you did a great deal of legal work for the textile firms. 
I wonder if you would care to comment on that statement and what type of practice or what association you did have with the textile firms. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, beginning shortly after the second world war there began a general industrial expansion in the South. New plants were being built, and not just textiles, all kinds of industry. And many of the concerns interested in locating plants in the State came to me for legal advice. And being in the practice of law, I was not displeased to see them. And I did what I could to help them re­solve legal questions which they had. Of course, they had a great many. But I served only as a legal adviser to them with respect to legal questions they would run into in connection with the location or construction of a new plant in my State. 
If the implication is that I went out to such people and enticed them into the State, I didn't do that. I was a lawyer, not a salesman. 
Senator TYDINGS. During your years in practice, did you do any 
legal work or did your firm do any legal work for Deering Milliken 
or any of its subsidiaries ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, for years and years we have rep­
resented Judson Mills, which is located in Greenville. At one time 
that amounted to a substantial amount of legal work. 
Deering Milliken acquired control of that, and after that we did 
very little for it. Very infrequently we handled local things that had 
to be handled on a local basis, by local people. Its general work was 
handled by someone else. 
Senator TYDINGS. Were you or your firm or any of your partners 
ever general counsel for Deering Milliken or any of its subsidiaries ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Not only not general counsel, we were not 
counsel at all for them except in this one connection with Judson 
Mills which was controlled—the result of that control was substan­tial loss of that as a client, but we still would do some, handle local 
things that had to be handled on a local basis. 
Senator TYDINGS. At the time of the Darlington Manufacturing Company case, do you know whether or not any of the officers, direc­tors, and controlling stockholders of Deering Milliken were aware of your one-seventh interest in Carolina Vendomatic ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I am sure they were not. 
Senator TYDINGS. Why do you say you are sure they were not ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, as far as I am aware, no one outside of this very small group plus bankers in Greenville were aware at all of it. Nothing had been done to let it bo known. 
Senator TYDINGS. When did you first become 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. And in the reports that they filed, the people that had to do with the location of these things in their plants in 1963 have all said that they were not aware that I had any interest in it. Senator TYDINGS. When the Darlington Mills case came before the 
court, did you consider disqualifying yourself ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. It did not occur to me at all. But again I say I was not consciously aware of any connection I had, and I cer­tainly was not aware of any financial interest I might have in the out­come of that law suit. And I am still not aware of any. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Simon Sobeloff has written a law review article in this area of judicial conflict of interest. Let me quote him and I would like your comment on what relationship his comments, have to your decision to sit on the Darlington Mills case. Judge Sobeloff wrote: 
One can readily see that if a judge serves as an officer or director of a com­mercial enterprise, not only is he disqualified in cases involving that enterprise, 
but his impartiality may also be consciously or unconsciously affected when per­
sons having business relations with his company come before him. Now, would you comment on that statement and whether or not it has any relationship to your serving on the panel that heard the Darlington Mills case? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I would say that what is important, of course, is not a technical office one holds unless he is active—if he is an active officer, of course, that could have all sorts of influence on what he did as a judge. In this instance, I had no active office with re­spect to its outside affairs, though I was in 1963 a director and vice 
president. But the only influence that was borne on me was my inter­est as a stockholder. And this could have resulted in some financial 
interest if my interest as a stockholder was known and someone doing 
business with Vend-A-Matic sought to influence my vote by doing 
something I otherwise would not have done. But unless you make 
those assumptions, which I think are contradicted in the record, then 
I don't think there was or could have been any financial influence. 
Senator TYDINGS. In the letter which you wrote to Senator Eastland 
in response to the queries of Senator Hart and myself, you stated that 
you have disqualified yourself in cases in which you had a stock inter­est in a party or in one which would be directly affected by the out­
come of the litigation. 
Would you tell us the circumstances involved in these cases ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, the only ones that I can actually recall 
are the cases of a concern in which I actually held stock, J. P. 
Stephens, for instance; I have not sat on their cases. 
Senator TYDINGS. In your statement to Chairman Eastland you 
observed that the judges of the fourth circuit have brought their 
interests, if they had an interest in a matter being litigated before 
them, to the attention of the parties involved. 
Now, did you do this in the Darlington case ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir; because I did not regard myself as 
having any financial interest in the outcome, and I still do not. 
Where that has arisen, and it has been done recently, with respect to one particular judge, where lie has had a very small interest in a national concern, stock interest, and he has found it out on the eve of the hearing, in those instances this direct, immediate stock interest in a party has been reported to the lawyers—it is done by the clerk— assuring that if either side has the least objection to his having a part a substitution would be made. In each instance the lawyers concerned said they did not wish him to withdraw'. But this is the case of a very small but direct stock interest. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Haynsworth, as you know, our Subcom­mittee on Improvements in Judicial Machinery has been active in the field of judicial reform and indeed you have been one of those jurists in the Nation who have supported us in our efforts to create a Federal judicial removal commission and to require financial disclosure by judges. 
I have been recently referred to one statement that you made on June 2 of this year in a hearing before my subcommittee. We were discussing the general area of judicial disclosure. Let me read a ques­tion which I propounded to you and an answer which you gave, and then I would appreciate it if you would explain the answer. 
This is my question. And this related to what a judge should dis­close in a financial statement. My question: What about the disclosure of the name and address of each foundation, elee­mosynary institution, and each business and professional corporation, firm or en­terprise in which the judge was an officer, director, proprietor or partner during the preceding year? 
Your answer: Judge HAYNSWORTH. I certainly would have no objection to such a thing as 
that. I don't believe most judges would. I think there is very little remnant of 
that. Now comes the part of your answer which I would like you to clarify. Of course, When I went on the bench I resigned from all such business asso­ciations I had, directorships and things of that sort. The only one I retained is 
the trusteeship of this small foundation which I mentioned in my main state­
ment, and I think that perhaps the best rule for a judge to go by now is to stop 
doing even that much. I believe, Judge, that when you went on the bench you did not resign from all business associations. You resigned from all except two. Judge HAYNSWORTH. All but two; that's correct, sir. But by the time I was there I had resigned from those, and the only thing I re­tained was this trusteeship of this small foundation to which I referred. Senator TYDINGS. In 1964, Judge Haynsworth, you were selected to serve on a panel of judges whose purpose was to consult with the American Bar Association's Committee on Professional Ethics about all questions involving the canons of judicial ethics. I wonder if you would tell us about the nature of this panel and the extent of your participation on it. Judge "HAYNSWORTH. We get—this is a committee of judges, and any question that arises in the American Bar Association Committee on Ethics involving judicial ethics is referred to us by mail. We get inquiries by mail and we respond by mail. We never have met in a group. But we receive specific inquiries with requests for responses, and I respond to them. Senator TYDINGS. HOW many such inquiries have you received? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Not a great many. Since I have been on, just a guess, 6 or 8. Senator TYDINGS. DO you write opinions in connection with these queries or Judge HAYNSWORTH. The response is by informal letter. Senator TYDINGS. Who is the chairman of that panel ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. The chairman has been a gentleman in St. Louis whose name is outside of my Senator TYDINGS. IS he is lawyer or a judge? Judge HAYNSWORTH. He is a lawyer. Senator TYDINGS. HOW many judges are on it and how many lawyers are on it? Judge HAYNSWORTH. The group on which, of which I am one, I think, are all judges, but we serve to advise only—the chairman is the chairman of the Committee on Ethics that has to do with lawyers' ethics, everything, and the only function we serve is when he has a question involving ethics of a Judge, he consults us by mail and—— Senator TYDINGS. In other words, whenever a lawyer Judge HAYNSWORTH (continuing). We respond by mail. Senator TYDINGS. Whenever a lawyer complains to the ABA Com­mittee on Professional Ethics, those inquiries involving judicial canons get an advisory opinion from your group ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. This is individual. Sometimes it arises by a judge raising a question, should I or should I not do this? 
Senator TYDINGS. The Judicial Conference in 1963 adopted the resolution that a justice or judge in the United States shall not serve in the capacity of an officer, director, or proprietor of an organization organized for profit. Do you support this resolution? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I was not a member at the time. I learned about this just after it was done. And I had not thought that the reason for not doing such things applied to the two small concerns that I remained as a director of. But when rules are adopted I recognize they ought to be sharp and clean, and I promptly accepted what the con­ference had done and resigned from these two directorships. 
Senator TYDINGS. Well, do you think it a fair statement that the rules for conduct or deportment of Federal judges or the tenets of ethics so far as the members of the Federal bench are concerned have been so illusory or hazy as to really be ineffective insofar as providing real guidance for members of the bench ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I am very certain it could be im­proved, and the Committee on Court Administration is now at work attempting to devise more specific rules. I hope they can come up with something. 
Senator TYDINGS. In your statement that you submitted to the committee, you stated that your recollection was that you resigned as vice president of Carolina Vend-A-Matic in 1957. Can you explain why you were carried on the books of the company as vice president until 1964? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. It's a case of the shoemaker's children. 
The meetings we had were extremely informal, as I said, usually at lunch, and I am sure what happened was that after this a motion was made to reelect the same group to serve as officers from the year before, and the minutes for that year were picked up for the next year. 
Senator TYDINGS. Did you ever receive any salary or remunera­tion as vice president of Carolina Vend-A-Matic while you were on the Federal bench? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Haynsworth, as you know, in the 90th Con­gress and again in the 91st Congress I introduced a bill to provide for the filing of certain financial reports and certain disclosures by judges and justices of the United States. 
I would like to know whether you would comply with the provisions of this bill if you are confirmed by the U.S. Senate, and particularly I wish to know if you would object to filing with the Judicial Confer­ence of the United States the following reports on your personal fi­nancial interests: 
1.
 A report of your income and spouse's income for the preceding year and the sources thereof and the amount and nature of the income received from each such source; 
 
2.
 The name and address of each private foundation eleemosynary institution and each business or professional corporation, firm, or enter­prise of which you are an officer, director, proprietor, or partner during the preceding year; 
 
3.
 The identity of each liability of $5,000 or more owed by you, or by you and your spouse jointly at any time during the preceding 
 
3T
ear; 
4.
 The source and value of all gifts in the aggregate amount of a value of $50 or more from any single source received by you during the preceding year except gifts from your wife or your children or your parents; 
 
5.
 The identity of each trust or fiduciary relation in which you held a beneficial interest having a value of $10,000 or more and identity, if known, of each interest or trust or other fiduciary relation in real or personal property in which you held a beneficial interest having a value of $10,000 or more at any time during the preceding year; 
 
6.
 The identity of each interest in real or personal property having a value of $10,000 or more which you owned at any time during the preceding year; 
 
7.
 The amount and source of each honorarium of $300 or more re­ceived by you during the preceding year, and finally, the source and amount of all money other than that received from the U.S. Govern­ment received in the form of an expense account or as reimbursement for expenditures during the preceding year. 
 
Would you have any objection ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I would not at all. As you know, while the proposal has not been as detailed as the ones you have now read, I have been in support of such a requirement. 
Senator TYDINGS. During your service on the Judicial Conference and particularly this past year did you support the resolution dealing with judicial disclosure proposed by the Chief Justice? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did. Senator TYDINGS. DO you feel that those resolutions help clarify the requirements of judicial ethics ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I hope they are going to be put in more detailed, explicit form. This should come up at the meeting to be held next month. I think there is a lot more to be done than has been done. But I was in support of what was done at the meeting in June. 
Senator TYDINGS. DO you favor their application to the members of the Supreme Court as well as to other members of the Federal bench ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The question is whether or not the Conference can make them apply. 
Senator TYDINGS. Legally I don't think the Conference can, but I am inquiring whether the Supreme Court itself should adopt the same rules. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. But if the Senate in its wisdom should con­firm me for the Supreme Court, I will comply with whatever lower court judges do.
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Haynsworth, from your letter and your statement it is my understanding that at some time during the period you were on the Federal bench, in either 1963 or 1964, Carolina Vend-A-Matic retained a law firm to incorporate a subsidiary and that same law firm subsequently was counsel of record for the Darlington Manufacturing Co. 
Would you give us the facts of that situation as you know them? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I knew nothing in the world about it at the time. I do know that earlier when a subsidiary was organized in Georgia, my former law firm procured the help of a law firm in Au­gusta which supplied the initial directors, incorporators, and so forth, and turned the corporate shell back. 
On inquiry when this came up, I found out the same thing had happened in North Carolina, and the reason this particular law firm in Greensboro was requested to do that was a close personal friend­ship between one of my former law partners, Francis Marion and Willy Holderness, a member of the Greensboro law firm. The}' fre­quently called on each other for that kind of work. 
But a corporate shell was formed up there, then returned to Senator TYDINGS. HOW big was the law firm in Greensboro, how many lawyers, roughly? Was it one of the biggest firms? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. I don't know the number of its part­ners but—Senator, I am guessing but they must have 10 or 12 or 15 men. 
Senator ERVIN. If I may interject myself at this point, I am very 
familiar with that law firm. 
Senator TYDINGS. HOW big is it? 
 
Senator ERVIN. The firm offered me a partnership years ago. I wish I would have taken it. They have about five or six partners and they probably have 25 or 30 lawyers, I imagine. 
And incidentally, Bill Holderness, who is now unfortunately dead, killed in an accident, his firm was in the Darlington case, but the man that handled the Darlington case for his firm was Thornton Brooks. Bill Holderness, I know, didn't do trial work at all. He did counsel­ing and drawing of papers, and he was a very excellent lawyer. That firm is one of the finest law firms in ability and integrity in the United States. 
Senator TYDINGS. Well, now, Judge Haynsworth, as I understand, for the record, the name of the firm was McLendon, Brim, Holderness and Brooks. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. 
Senator TYDINGS. And that the subsidiary to Carolina Vend-A-Matic was called Vend Co., and the three partners of the firm actu­ally were appointed directors, at least directors of record for the sub­sidiary, and those three partners of the firm were W. H. Holderness, 
G. Neil Daniels, and Kent M. Brim. It's also my understanding that the counsel for Darlington in its case before the Fourth Circuit was Thornton Brooks, another partner. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That's correct. 
Senator TYDINGS. I wonder if you could tell us whether or not Mr. Thornton Brooks, who was the partner who handled the Darlington case, had any knowledge of the fact that other lawyers in his firm had incorporated a subsidiary to Carolina Vend-A-Matic, or had any knowledge of any relationship which you had to Carolina Vend-A-Matic. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I have no reason to suppose that Mr: Brooks knew, but, of course, I don't know. Of course, at the time this inquiry was made, he then knew of my relation to Vend-A-Matic. 
 
Senator TYDINGS. In the letter to Judge Simon Sobeloff, Chief Judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals, dated January 13, 1964, under letterhead of McLendon, Brim, Holderness and Brooks and signed by 
Thornton H. Brooks, the first paragraph reads as follows, and my question to you is do you have any knowledge to the contrary? This is a letter to Judge Sobeloff. It says: Your letter of January 7, with enclosures, was received by my office dur­ing my absence. Serious allegations and inferences contained in the letter of 
Miss Eames compel me to promptly reply to the extent possible at this time. 
The Court has solicited the comment of counsel for their clients, and I am re­
plying on behalf of my client, Darlington Manufacturing Company, although 
it is no longer in existence. I understand that counsel for Deering Milliken, Inc., 
will communicate with the Court in due course as to Carolina Vend-A-Matic 
Company, about which I have no knowledge whatsoever. 
Is that the fact so far as you know it? Judge HAYNSWORTH. SO far as I know, it is. Senator TYDINGS. Judge Haynsworth, some able journalists have 
alleged that you were in violation of canon 26 of the Code of Judicial Ethics for 10 years by reason of the relationship you had with Caro­lina Vend-A-Matic. As you know, canon 26 provides, and I will read it, that 
A judge should abstain from making personal investments in enterprises 
which are apt to be involved in litigation in the court; and, after his accession 
to the bench, he should not retain such investments previously made, longer 
than a period sufficient to enable him to dispose of them without serious loss. 
Would you give the committee your views on the application of 
canon 26 to your investment in Carolina Vend-A-Matic? Senator KENNEDY. Would the Senator yield? Could you just read the second part of that, as well ? Senator TYDINGS. Let me read the whole thing. 
A judge should abstain from making personal investments in enterprises which 
are apt to be involved in litigation in the court; and, after his accession to the 
bench, he should not retain such investments previously made, longer than a 
period sufficient to enable him to dispose of them without serious loss. It is 
desirable that he should, so far as reasonably possible, refrain from all relations 
which would normally tend to arouse the suspicion that such relations warp or 
bias his judgment, or prevent his impartial attitude of mind in the administra­tion of his judicial duties. He should not utilize information coming to him in a judicial capacity for 
purposes of speculation ; and it detracts from the public confidence in his integrity 
and the soundness of his judicial judgment for him at any time to become a 
speculative investor upon the hazard of a margin. 
I would like to hear, and I think the committee would like to hear your views on the application of canon 26 to your own investment in and relationship to Carolina Vend-A-Matic. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, of course I don't have—the vending 
concern was not likely at all to be involved in any law suit in my court. Senator TYDINGS. Was it ever involved in a law suit ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. No, sir. It was much less likely to be 
involved in any large concern in which investments, of course, might be approved, like Chrysler or GM or such things as that, with wide­spread business all across the country. 
Senator TYDINGS. The second part of that first paragraph says: It is desirable that he should, so far as reasonably possible, refrain from all 
relations which would normally tend to arouse the suspicion that such relations 
warp or bias his judgement, or prevent his impartial attitude of mind in the 
administration of his judicial duties. 
Would you comment on that ?
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, this is directed, I suppose, to relations with gamblers and people like this, with backgrounds that were sus­pect or shady. And I have had no such relations. 
Senator TYDINGS. When was the first time there was any public knowledge or awareness that you were an investor or stockholder in Carolina Vend-A-Matic? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't think that became known until after this appointment. It became known to the people involved in this law suit, of course, in December 1963. But I don't think it went much be­yond that. But the fact 
Senator TYDINGS. Was that the first time it became a matter of public knowledge ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It was not then known, as far as I know, except to the Textile Workers Union and officials of Deering Milliken and the lawyers and members of my court, and so on, but not generally known elsewhere. But then I was concerned that others might know, and this is what impelled me to take extraordinary steps to rid myself of the stock at that time. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Haynsworth, at the time of the Darlington Manufacturing case, what was the financial extent of any investments you might have had with any southern textile companies? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, at that time I owned a small amount of stock in J. P. Stevens. I haven't bought or sold anything since. So it is as reported in my statement. 
I owned stock in Dan River Mills, which is in the statement; a small amount of stock in Southern Weaving, which is in the statement. I don't think there has been any change in any of those since 1963. 
Senator TYDINGS. They are basically as you submitted it to the com­mittee ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. AS reported now. 
Senator TYDINGS. DO you know what percentage of Carolina Vend-­A-Matic's business was in 1963 with textile companies? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. And going down the list, I can't—I don't know—of the list in the file, I don't know whether some of them are textile concerns or not. Some I know are, some I don't. But I have no idea what the proportion is. 
Senator TYDINGS. Judge Haynsworth, in 1961, when you wrote the opinion in Deering Milliken, Inc., versus Johnston, which I think Senator Ervin went into, a matter which was related to the Darling­ton case, didn't this give you any forewarning of a possible conflict of interest problem which might arise ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know that I understand, sir. 
Senator TYDINGS. Well, when you sat on that case, did the problem of conflict of interest ever occur to you ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir; it did not. Senator, I was not consciously aware of any business connection 
with Deering Milliken at all. I never had been their lawyer. I per­sonally had no connection with them. I wasn't personally aware of this vending concern deal. It is possible that other stocks that I owned, that those in turn may have had business with them, too, but I don't know. I certainly wasn't consciously aware of that, and I think the 
conclusion of the lawsuit in 1961, which Senator Ervin suggested, was adverse to them. It was not in their favor. 
Senator TYDINGS. In the portfolio which you submitted to the com­mittee in response to the letter from Senator Hart and myself which specifies all your investments and the number of shares in each, well, there are better than 30 or 40 different companies 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I own a few shares in Chrysler. It buys car­pets. I don't know from whom. But it may buy some from this con­cern. But I don't know that it does. But I see them in cars. I know they must acquire them from some producers of such goods. 
The CHAIRMAN. There is a call for a vote hi the Senate. Suppose we go over to 10:30 in the morning. 
Senator TYDINGS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank Judge Haynsworth. That would conclude the questions which I have to pro­pound to him. 
The CHAIRMAN. We will meet at 10:30 tomorrow.
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, I have, Mr. Chairman. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. The information I sought was out of the $100,000 which were gross receipts that were received by your company from the—was it the Darlington Co. ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Not it, but Deering Milliken. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Yes, from one of their affiliates—or two of their affiliates, I believe. You received, your company received $100,000 gross. And I asked you what was the net profit to your company and what your share of that profit would be. 
Now, do you have those figures ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. YOU have those by telegram, I believe, is that 
correct ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. This is from Mr. Dennis who was the head of Vend-A-Matic at the time and is now a regional official of ARA. And he says the average profit would have been $5,460 before taxes; after taxes, $2,730. And one-seventh of that would be $390. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. $390 would have been your share of the profits? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator MCCLELLAN. I ask, Mr. Chairman, that the telegram be ad­
mitted into the record. 
 
The CHAIRMAN. It will be admitted into the record. Senator MCCLELLAN. I thank you. 
 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, I would like to call your attention to the fact that you played hell when you sold that stock; you got $437,000, and yesterday those 14,173 shares of ARA would have brought you $1,587,­
376. Therefore, you lost over a million dollars. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Mr. Chairman, I didn't sell this because I 
thought it was not a good investment to retain. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bayh. Senator BATH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield to Senator Hart, Mr. Chairman. He has to leave this after­
noon. The CHAIRMAN. He has preference if he wants it. I understood you to yield. 
Senator HART. Judge, you are listening to somebody who is hung up with a long record himself. I have insisted that it is unwise and un­desirable in confirmation hearings, with respect to sitting judges, to cross-examine them on specific cases. 
As Senator Thurmond said in introducing you, you have a record— it speaks for itself and it shouldn't be confused by comment in the non­judicial setting of this hearing room. 
I don't intend to do it. But I now share the frustration of some of my colleagues who in the past few years have felt very strongly about the desirability of finding out how you could possibly come to certain judicial conclusions. 
The second point: I hope that the letter which Senator Tydings and 1 addressed to you was not interpreted as an effort to embarrass or to chastise you.
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It was not, Senator. I assure you it was not. 
Senator HART. AS the letter indicated and as all of us by our ques­tioning have shown, we sense a very serious responsibility now and hereafter to develop fully all interests of any nominee for the Fed­eral courts. It is to the best interests, I am sure, not alone of the court and the committee, but of the nominee. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Of course, sir. Senator HART. And that is exactly what we have in mind. So hung up on the proposition that we don't go through a line, of 
questions on specific cases let me approach it this way: 
We have been hearing for months, years, that what we need on the Supreme Court is a strict constructionist. Now, what is that? I take it you are one. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I have been said to be one. I don't know—I don't know what it is and I certainly do not know that I am one. Again, one can read what I have written as judge and draw conclusions from it. But I have not labeled myself a strict construc­tionist. And I think if you read some opinions I have written, you would not think I was. 
Senator HART. I am trying to find out what it is that I should es­tablish as the standard against which to make that judgment. And apparently this definition was not discussed with you by the Presi­dent who nominated you. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The term has not been defined to me by any­one, sir. Senator HART. I think it is politically a popular phrase, but we would all be the better off if it was more clearly defined. Now, certainly in the mind of the man who nominated you, Earl Warren is not a strict constructionist. That opinion is shared by many. I think he was an outstanding, mag­nificent Chief Justice. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. He is a very close friend of mine. 
Senator HART. I am speaking now of what he did in terms of lead­ing that Court in the direction that history will reflect was very timely, in the best long term interests of this country. He got into trouble because he said, among other things, that "separate but equal" wasn't equal and wasn't constitutional. 
Do you agree with him? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I certainly do. 
Senator HART. He said that the right to counsel of a man under a criminal charge was a right that was available to rich and poor alike; if you couldn't afford it, you didn't lose it. We would provide coun­sel for you. 
Now, do you think that is good ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, we have upheld that right again and again in my court. 
Senator ERVIN. If the Senator will pardon me for committing an unpardonable sin, I am glad at long last the Senator from Michigan agrees with me that a Senator has a right to ascertain the view of a nominee for the Supreme Court. 
Senator HART. I am ascertaining whether he agrees with Earl Warren. 
Senator ERVIN. And I would like to say that I am glad to have a con­vert to my philosophy. However, I never did get one of the previous nominees to ever reveal any of his political or constitutional phil­osophy. And I was told at the time that it was highly improper for me to seek to ascertain it. 
Excuse me. I won't interrupt you any more. 
Senator HART. I was trying to figure out a device that would enable me not to backtrack on the position I have taken earlier, and none­theless 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It is very hard to do. 
Senator HART. And nonetheless find out if we were asked to consent to the nomination of a man who thought that the di­rection of the Supreme Court under Earl Warren should be reversed or modified. 
Now, I think that is a fair question because on its answer hinges, I suspect, my vote. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, there are going to be some witnesses here who have seen many of the opinions I have written and what I have done, who can express their own opinions on the basis of the record that I have made, on where I stand. And I think, sir, instead of trying to label myself as to what kind of judge I am, that someone objectively who has read what I had written can do it much better than I. 
As far as what you wish me to say what I would do after I am on the Supreme Court, if the Senate should confirm me, I don't think I should get into that. And this is the position, of course, you have had throughout. If I speculate now on what I am going to do in a particu­lar field or in a particular case, as a Justice, if I become one, then I put myself in a position, too, that I couldn't sit on a case in that field when it came up. 
Senator HART. YOU are right about that. And in the past I think and others I have been right in not trying to pin a nominee into a position that will estop him once he is on the Court. 
But I think I have an obligation to myself to try to determine whether in your mind the direction and thrust that the record of the Warren Court reflects is consistent with your own ideas. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I have a problem about—I would like to do all I can to help you in answer to your question, and I have a prob­lem in my own mind as to how I can respond directly to that without getting into the realm of what I would expect to do as a Justice, if I become one. 
But now in most of the areas in which the Supreme Court has been active within the last few years, we have had cases in my court, and I have sat upon them and I have written about them. And there are going to be witnesses here who will be prepared to talk about what I have done and where I have stood, from which I think you can divine what course I might take as a Justice. 
But I don't think, myself, I should have a comment about it. 
Senator KENNEDY. Would the Senator 
Senator HART. If I could just explain the reason I feel so strongly— the reason I seek to get this response. 
We don't have to be Ph. D.'s in sociology to know that there is great alienation and hostility in the country. It is not the young alone. It is not the black alone. It is not the poor alone. 
It has been my feeling that the direction of the Warren Court has strengthened the responsible leadership in this country which urges that inequities be corrected within the law. Slowing down the direction of the Warren Court assists only the irresponsible voices. That's my concern. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I recognize it, sir, and I wish I could respond more directly; but I can't think now I might, except to give some idea of what my present thoughts about how cases would be held in the future in the Supreme Court, cases, of course, where I haven't read 
the briefs or haven't heard the lawyers and in a field, too, which I think I should approach with an open mind when the case comes up, and not on the basis of some expression of a prior opinion. 
Senator HART. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me ask that there be printed in the record about a dozen decisions which the nominee either par­ticipated in or wrote. 
The CHAIRMAN. It will be made a part of the record. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, sir, I think they are of tremendous importance. These things are coming before my court now. 
Of course, we are getting expanding contentions in conscientious objector cases. You mentioned this—first amendment cases. These are coming constantly. I have written upon it. I have sat on cases. Very recently we have handed down cases involving soldiers' protests, things of this sort. 
I don't know what I can say more than that certainly I think it is of tremendous importance to the country as a whole and the response of the courts is of great importance to the country as a whole. 
But again, as I answered Senator Hart, I don't know how I pan express opinions in the context of problems in a particular area with­out speculating about what I might do if a member of the Supreme Court. 
Senator KENNEDY. Well, just for myself, I was really more inter­ested in how you view the frustrations of young people. I mean, for example, we are all so quick to talk about the questions of civil dis­obedience in terms of many of the young people in our society today. And in talking with these young people, they throw up the fact that in many instances judges themselves have failed to follow the laws as interpreted by the Supreme Court in terms of the establishment of basic rights for citizens. And they say, isn't it really just the first civil obedience and why should we be suddenly brought up and condemned ? 
What I am really interested in, and perhaps I am not making myself clear, is at least some awareness and concern on your part about 
these forces and factors which I personally believe are the most moving forces in our country today, some appreciation of them, some under­standing of them, awareness of why they exist, and a real sensitivity of what they can mean in terms of our whole system of judicial and legislative and executive action. 
I think especially in terms of our judgment as Senators this is a proper criterion in the consideration of a nominee. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, as long as I can remember, there has been some gap in understanding between young people and older people, while perhaps today it is greater than at any other time in my recollection. 
But I always thought it of tremendous importance that older people understand what goes on in the minds and hearts of younger people, as they should. 
I can say I certainly attempt to. And I think if one reads all I have written in that field that I am—well, I don't want to characterize myself, but I certainly have written in this field, and I don't think you will find me unaware or unconcerned about the rights of folk who need protection of the law. 
Senator KENNEDY. DO you have some feelings of why these move­ments of the poor and the young have developed and why they are expressing themselves in such a disenchanted way at the present time ? Do you have some personal views on this ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Of the underlying causes ? 
Senator KENNEDY. Pardon ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Of the underlying causes ? 
Senator KENNEDY. Yes. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, they are so complex that I don't know that I could expound them in a short space of time, but our social and economic history provides a tremendous background for it. 
Senator KENNEDY. Well, other than our looking back to our social and economic history, is this the response to that question that you want to give? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I think most of the young people today who are disturbed with what is going on think this country does not realise the promise it held for them when the Constitution was adopted and as history ensued since, and they are impatient to achieve realization of what they think ought to be the objective of our society. It is a very complex thing. Much is involved in it. But I am thoroughly aware that they are impatient, that they think the ultimate objectives have not been achieved, and they want to see them achieved. 
Senator KENNEDY. DO you think there is any reason why they are more impatient today than, say, they were 10 or 15 years ago, 20 years ago, 50 years ago ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, there is much broader concern on the part of everyone now than there was when I was a young man, for instance. 
Most people weren't even thinking much about it. 
Senator KENNEDY. I would like to, Mr. Chairman, yield at this point, with the right to come back. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Very well. Senator Bayh. 
Senator BAYH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
Judge Haynsworth, you have already been adequately welcomed by the committee. Perhaps it 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It is nice to see you, too, sir. 
Senator BAYH. Has not been too warm a welcome, 
but I repeat the congratulations on your being nominated by the President. It is not very often in a man's lifetime that such an honor comes to him and it happens to very few people at that. 
There have been a number of questions raised, philosophical ques­tions which you have suggested will be covered by other witnesses, so I will not pursue your thoughts on this. 
I think, perhaps, the unfortunate aspect of this whole business is that there has been some question raised about ethics, personal in­tegrity, and that's hard for any man to listen to. I personally am hopeful that all these matters will be laid to rest by the time we get through airing all the facts. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I share that hope, sir. Senator BAYH. I would like to make, if I might, one or two obser­vations before asking Judge Haynsworth some questions. 
It seems to me that over the past several years at least, some of us have had a feeling that the judicial system that has long been what I think we would have to describe as the stabilizing influence in our democracy, this system has become a target of increasing attack not only by the citizenry at large, but by some members of the bar. 
Indeed, as we know, there have been overtures that a former Su­preme Court Justice should indeed have been impeached. It has been a most unfortunate period, in my judgment, as far as the degree of controversy which has been directed at the Court. 
I think because of this and because of the fact that there seems to be a general concern—and I think this is a meritorious concern—on the part of an increased number of citizens, particularly among our young people, that we need to find ways to strengthen the standards of conduct of public officials, to put a new coat of paint on the system or the establishment, to make it more responsive, to make sure that the members that serve within it are beyond reproach. 
This, related to the particularly unique position of the Court, I think, puts your nomination in a very special position in history and thus highlights the discussions before this committee. 
Because of this I, personally, think that we, the members of this committee, indeed we, as Members of the Senate itself, have a rather unique opportunity, perhaps we should call it an obligation, to set, once and for all, uniform standards and criteria which will be applied specifically to each prospective judicial nominee. 
I suggest that we consider the development of a standard set of questions dealing with personal, business, professional, and financial matters which will be applied to all nominees to the Federal judiciary. I think it would be an opportune time for this committee, and the Senate, to put the President, future Presidents, and all prospective nominees on notice that we in the Senate Judiciary Committee are de­termined to ask these questions before the fact, if you please, and not silently await some future date when our lack of foresight may bring embarrassment to a member of the judiciary, to the judicial system of 
this country, and perhaps seriously further erode the confidence of the people]e of this country in our Government. So with this suggestion, Judge Haynsworth, I would appreciate your willingness to address yourself to some questions: 
I might say, before proceeding further, that it has been my opinion from everything that I have read, particularly from conversations that I have had with the distinguished junior Senator from South Carolina, Senator Hollings, who, as you know, is a strong advocate of your candidacy, that you are an honest man, with a fine reputation. 
t want to deal now with the three general areas that I suggested yesterday. Looking at your law firm relationship—and I want to emphasize what I said earlier about the matter of ethical conduct. It is not merely a matter of maliciousness or intention to do wrong that we must deal with but it is a matter of degree and appearance. 
Now, looking at your law firm, we have in the record its legal name and all of this. You have been a member of that law firm for a long time. I understand it was originally sort of a family-oriented firm with your grandfather and your father a part of it—it was sort of in the family tradition, wasn't it? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir; it was. Senator BAYH. That is the kind of thing to brag about, I think, as a neophite member of the bar. Now, what kind of practice was it ? Was it in a specific area of the law ? Was it general 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. General civil law practice, sir. We did not ordinarily handle crimes then. But a rather broadly based practice of law. 
Senator BAYH. Did you deal with—well, I suppose you did deal with labor-management type cases? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Infrequently. We were not specialists in that field, and many clients that we had, had their own labor law specialists. Senator BAYH. Did you deal with utilities, bonding, financing of 
municipalities, schools, corporations ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir, all of those things. Senator BAYH. Did you handle any patent law cases, or anything 
like that? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I was in one patent law case. Most clients who got into a controversy about that did have a patent law specialist. Since I have been on the court I have gotten into the patent law 
field rather extensively. Senator BAYH. Did your law firm represent textile firms ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator BAYH. DO you have any idea how many ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, no, I don't recall now. We had a 
number. The principal textile client we had was J. P. Stevens, but there were others, also, that we represented. 
Senator BAYH. Could I ask you to, so as not to catch you at all off guard, and realizing you have been on the bench for some while and your memory in those circumstances would be somewhat hazy—I have a list here of various clients that your law firm has represented, as listed in Martindale Hubbell, to what degree this list is accurate? 
I would like for staff to clear with you the accuracy of these as much as some of these textile relationships were some years ago, cer­tainly before you were on the bench. I don't want to leave any false inference here. If we could check this out, I would like to put it in the record, Mr. Chairman, after it has been cleared with our witness. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Are you prepared, or will you be able to give the committee the names of all of the textile firms, textile companies your firm represented prior to the time that you went on the bench ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I could go back to the records and have some­one check the records, in my law firm, and produce such a list, Senator. I don't think I can now. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. If it is important, why, ask your law firm, if they will, to supply you such information as the record may reflect. 
Senator BATH. I may be erroneously informed, Mr. Chairman, but I have been informed that Judge Haynsworth's law firm does advise and counsel Martindale Hubbell on the accuracy of these matters in South Carolina. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Does what? I didn't understand Senator BATH. Does help in the preparation of the Martindale Hub-bell information for South Carolina. Judge HAYNSWORTH. It prepares the Digest of the State Laws for Martindale Hubbell. 
Senator BAYH. Right. I see no reason why you should have com­mitted to memory now, or recite from memory, all of the clients that you or your firm has represented prior to your going on the bench or, in fact, that your former firm represents now. And I don't want to even mention the firms involved here because there are several of them that had this relationship with your firm 5 or 10 years ago. 
So let's clear this up so that we don't try to give a false inference. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. I don't understand what the point is. You asked him about textile firms he represents now. I don't suppose he has represented any since he has been on the bench. 
Have you? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. 
Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, I suggested I thought it would be helpful, for the record, to find out what textile firms the judge's law firm represented prior to his going on the bench and what textile firms that same law firm, without his present services, represents now. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Well, I would require him, if he can make it available—I think he should be required, if the committee wants it, to submit the names of textile firms that he represented, or his firm represented, prior to the time that he became a judge. 
Now, I don't know that he is in a position to request his former firm to supply what industries they represent now. But if the com­mittee feels that it is of interest, why, we can have one of them come up here and testify about it. 
Senator BAYH. I don't want to press this, Mr. Chairman. I could introduce this compilation, which licts some 20 textile firms repre­sented by the Haynsworth law firm, into the record. 
I think that would be unfair, because some of these textile firms are not now represented by the firm. If the committee is not willing, I don't see why
Senator MCCLELLAN. I have no objection, but I don't think a judge who has been on the bench 10 years should be required to testify what his former law firm is doing now. I just don't think that is a fair question to him. He should be required only to supply from his memory or with the firm's aid what firms he had any connection with while he was an attorney. 
Senator BAYH. I concur in what the chairman said, 100 percent,, about the requirement—I think I said that twice now about the ad­visability of the judge to provide this information. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Very well. Get your firm to supply everything it will and can. I have no objection. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. Prior to going on the bench, did you serve on the board of directors, or as an officer, in any textile firms in your area? Judge HAYNSWORTH. A small concern, Southern Weaving Co., yes, sir. It made tapes, narrow fabrics, not broad woven fabrics. Senator BAYH. Did any of your other law partners serve on the board of directors of any textile firms ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I believe not; no, sir. 
Senator BAYH. May I ask your opinion, if I may, without getting into a philosophical question, about the Peering Milliken case ? Is it fair to say that was a pretty significant labor-management case ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I don't—it was an important case, certainly, to the parties, as most cases are. And how much more so this was than others, I can't say. But, yes, quite a good deal was involved. Five hundred employees had lost their jobs. Yes, it was important. 
Senator BAYH. I was thinking more about the confrontation that has existed, and does exist, between labor and management in the textile industry. The New York Times, December 10, 1964, quoted our illustrious senior colleague from North Carolina—I don't know how accurate this was, Senator Ervin. Alluding to the case it quoted the Senator: "It is not an exaggeration to say that free enterprise is the textile industry rides on this case." 
Now, I don't know 
Senator ERVEN. I think free enterprise in all industries rode on that case, because if the ruling of the National Labor Relations Board had been upheld by the Supreme Court, no businessman in the United States could go out of business completely and permanently after he once started to operate a business that affected interstate commerce if any union ever got into his business. He would have to stay in business until the last drop of economic blood was squeezed out of his business. Yes, I think a great freedom rode on that case. 
Personally, I don't think Congress can pass a law that requires a private company or individual who once engages in a business that affects interstate commerce, to stay in that business forever. And that was what the Supreme Court affirmed. So I think it was an important case. 
Senator BAYH. Justice Haynsworth, you may or may not concur in the opinion of our distinguished colleague from North Carolina. He was involved in that case. He certainly has a full awareness of many of the aspects, and has developed, as is usually the case, some rather tenacious arguments in support of his position. 
Senator ERVIN. And my position was sustained by the Supreme Court completely. I didn't have anything to do with the other points of the case. 
Senator BAYH. Well, I think there is some question about whether 
the Supreme Court did sustain the Senator's position or not. I am not fully
Senator ERVIN. Well, there is no question at all about it, none, be­cause they held a businessman could go out of business completely and permanently for any reason satisfactory to himself, including the advent of a union. 
If the Court hadn't held that, there wouldn't have been much freedom 
left in this land. Senator BAYH. DO you have any comment on that ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I can say that as far as I am concerned, 
the Supreme Court said that the majority was correct on the record that we had. And as far as any difference with the Supreme Court is concerned, that's all I can say. 
As far as the importance of the case, Senator, cases are more or less important, I suppose, depending upon a variety of viewpoints. But from my point of view as a judge, and my colleague's share the same point of view, every case is important. And we devote ourselves to try to come out with what we think is the right conclusion. 
We don't take a look at cases as if one is more important and we are going to spend a lot of time on this one and that one doesn't amount to anything. We treat every one as being important. 
Senator BAYH. I appreciate that fact. 
I want to lay to rest once and for all, or find out if there is any fire to sustain some of the smoke that has been floating around your nomination, relative to the relationship that you and your law firm have with the textile industry. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. The clientele that your firm has had, and the signifi­cant character of this case, has created the controversy. And when we get back to the ethical question, I want you to be prepared fully to expound whether in your judgment there was any conflict of interest there. 
Now, when did you leave the law firm ?Judge HAYNSWORTH. In 1957, when I was appointed to the court. Senator BAYH. YOU severed all connection with the firm at that time, 
as I recall the testimony yesterday. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes, completely. Senator BAYH. AS I recall, yesterday you said you did not receive 
any income from the law firm after going to the bench. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. When we agreed upon my interest in un­collected fees and things of that sort, the law firm did not have the cash to pay in cash then and we agreed that they would pay it over the next 2 years. 
Senator BAYH. Well, that is a reasonable thing. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator BAYH. I mean, this isn't the kind of continuing interest 
that would be subject to criticism. Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO. My interest was appraised as of the day I left and they paid me that, and that was all. 
Senator BAYH. Did you have any jointly owned property, or any continuing relationship, with new members of the firm carried on after going to the bench ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. No, with the exception, of course, of my stock 
interest in a 
Senator BAYH. Carolina. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Vending concern and with two 
other little small pieces of real estate which I referred to in my financial statement, too. This was a firm of several individuals who Senator BAYH. I notice that Law Buildings, Inc. apparently was 
the owner of the property held by the law firm. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, that is correct. Senator BAYH. I understand that you have severed all ownership 
in that corporation now. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. They bought my interest in that. Senator BAYH. Did they do that at the same time Judge HAYNSWORTH. AS of the time I left, yes. Senator BAYH. Have any members of your family any relation­
ship to the law firm or received any profits from the law firm since you have gone on the bench ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I have a young cousin who is a member of that firm now. He was not there when I left it. But a young cousin of mine is, recently became a partner in that law firm. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, is this any special relationship, or is he just working like the other lawyers and getting fees Judge HAYNSWORTH. He went there as a clerk, just as every other clerk, and has moved up until now he is a partner. Senator BAYH. NOW, let's leave that business of the law firm for a moment and go to Carolina Vend-A-Matic Co. 
I notice that the Chairman pointed out that you had taken a real skinning in selling your stock, losing a million dollars by getting out right away. In light of all the controversy, you might say right now it wasn't worth that $450,000 you got out of it. But that's neither here nor there. 
Could you tell us, for the record, what type of business it was and 
the way in which the machines were installed ? As I recall, the total capitalization of the company was $30,000. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Authorized capital. Senator BAYH. Yes, authorized capitalization. And that there was 
$12,700 of that put in. Judge HAYNSWORTH. I believe that is correct, sir. Senator BAYH. Well, if that isn't, we will amend it. And that your capital there was about $1,800 ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO. I paid in $3,000. Senator BAYH. $3,000? Where did I get $1,800? I am sorry. Now, as I recall from yesterday, that was about a seventh interest 
or was exactly one-seventh ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. If you disregard one share, it was one-seventh, approximately one-seventh. 
Senator BAYH. Right. You mentioned yesterday that there were additional loans that had been agreed upon and that you were a sig­natory to those loans. Yesterday you weren't quite certain what the amounts were. Have you had a chance to give the committee the bene­fit of just how much additional capitalization you were involved in, in which you were obligated in addition to the $3,000? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, I haven't attempted to check that, sir. I know when the two initial stockholders were through, out of con­cern because of their exposure, they began to get concerned when the amount of the endorsed loans passed $50,000. It kept on going up. Ultimately, checking from the financial statements that were entered in the record, though I do not have them now 
Senator BAYH. We don't need to pursue it because you haven't tried to hide that at all, and I am sure if any member of the committee wants to get it, they can. 
Do you remember, specifically, who those funds were borrowed from, inasmuch as you did say yesterday that was part of the business you were directing? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Generally, endorsed loans were obtained from the South Carolina National Bank. 
Senator BAYH. I noticed, although I am not sure this has any direct relevancy, but I am intrigued by looking at the chart of the corpora­tion, which indicates the original charter had a $30,000 value, and then on April 8,1964, the capital stock value was decreased $12,700. Is there any significance to this at all in the corporate finances, any need to explain that or any reason behind it? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This was—I had no active part in this at the time, but I understand some lawyer of ABA wanted the authorized stock reduced to the amount that was then outstanding. 
Senator BAYH. This was prior to 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Why he wished it I don't know. 
Senator BAYH. This was prior to ARA assuming full ownership ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This was done in connection with the stock exchange, and why he wanted that that way I don't know because I was not a part of it, but it was done as a part of the stock exchange. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, I think just to make the record complete, you pretty well documented yesterday, very forthrightly, the original officers and directors of the company that was incorporated back in 1950 and that one, two, three, four, including yourself, were members of your law firm. Now, is that 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. At the outset; yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. Yes. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Four of the original five and two of the later seven were members of my law firm. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, I suppose when you got into this business you had some particular reasons for expecting that the vending machine company was going to succeed, or you wouldn't have invested your money. And it did fantastically well. Do you have any recollection about when that success began? I notice a fellow by the name of Dennis, that you referred to, was hired. Is there any special meaning to his being hired ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, the man we had at the outset, Mullens, did very well with it at the outset, and it grew to the point where he1 felt that it was beyond him, that he needed someone to take charge and let him work under his direction. It began with that. And we got Dennis in. Mullens stayed on. 
Senator BAYH. Dennis was hired in what, 1957 ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir; I believe that is correct. 
Senator BAYH. Had he been, as I recall, he had been with Judson 
Mills as a personnel manager Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think that is true. 
Senator BAYH (continuing). Or production manager, and then 
came with your corporation. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That's right.
Senator BAYH. With Vend-A-Matic. Well, now, there has been some insinuation that Dennis used this 
relationship, in one way or another, to get contracts for Carolina Vend-A-Matic from Deering Milliken. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I don't think he did. The record proves that if he tried, he was not very successful. He came from Judson Mills and we had coffee machines in that mill. But we had to remove them in 1958. And I don't know that he had any connections with other plants. But certainly after that he was in contact with other textile plants, other employers, all over, submitted bids each time he had a chance to. 
Senator BAYH. He did. He was successful in procuring the two con­tracts we discussed yesterday, which have been a matter of record, I think. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. One new one, really, Magnolia. Gayley Mill we have been in since 1952. The service there was expanded in 1958, but this was an expansion of the service that dated back to 1952. 
Senator BAYH. Dennis had a part ownership of Carolina Vend-A-
Matic. He was made an equal partner. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator BAYH. He was aware—was he or was he not—that you 
were then listed as the vice president and director? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes. Senator BAYH. Was he told not to disclose this to any of the other 
clientele that he was dealing with in procuring business? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes; he was. Senator BAYH. DO we have that listed any place in the record where 
we can nail that down once and for all, a board of directors' meeting or Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. I don't think so. Not only he but the remaining stockholders do, too. Senator BAYH. NOW, I want to repeat what we have had put in the record here, to keep to this line of questioning. 
Those companies that were Milliken-oriented, relating to this tele­gram that the chairman put in, produced about a hundred thousand dollars worth of business. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator BAYH. Three percent—did we agree on that figure from the computer, Mr. Chairman ? Have we got that answered yet % Senator MCCLELLAN. My recollection is 3.1 percent of the total gross 
income. Is that right? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes; I think that is correct. Senator MCCLELLAN. About 3.1 percent of the total income. I think 
that is what you said yesterday. The record will establish it. Senator BAYH. All right; so much for Deering Milliken. I notice from looking at the information you have supplied that the 
clientele of Carolina Vend-A-Matic is mainly textile mills. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, it served—what is there is a list of full 
food vending services in industrial plants. Senator BAYH. Let me just go down the list here. Judge HAYNSWORTH. And I suggest this is a pretty good cross section 
of the industrial plants in that area. Senator BAYH. Let me go down the list here and you tell me whether 
we are right or wrong. Judge HAYNSWORTH. All right, sir. Senator BAYH. I don't know how you pronounce this—Apalache. Is 
that the way you pronounce it ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Apalache Plant. Senator BAYH. Apalache Plant. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Textile plant. It is a textile plant. Senator BAYH. IS it true that that is owned by J. P. Stevens ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. It is. Senator BAYH. Bloomsburg Mill of Abbeville. That's Bloomsburg 
Mill of Bloomsburg, Pa. ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know what it is, sir. Senator BAYH. Carlisle Finishing Co., Union. That's a part of Cone 
Mills?1 Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, it is. Senator BAYH. Central Mill in Central is part of Cannon Mills ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know, sir. Senator BAYH. Delta Finishing Co. is J. P. Stevens ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. J. P. Stevens; yes, sir. Senator BAYH. And Diehl Manufacturing Co. is part of Singer 
Sewing. Judge HAYNSWORTH. AS far as I know, it is not in the textile busi­ness. This was an electric—I believe they made electric motors. Senator BAYH. I am sorry. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Nothing in connection with textiles. Senator BAYH. I want to clarify it. If they are not, I want to know it The Firth Carpet Co. in Laurens, S.C. ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. It is textiles, I assume, from its name. Senator BAYH. Mohasco Industries. Fort Shoals Mill, Fort Shoals, Regal Textile Corp. Judge HAYNSWORTH. I believe that is correct. Senator BAYH. F. W. Poe Manufacturing Co., Greenville, Burling­
ton Industries? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. Senator BAYH. Gayley Mill, Marietta, Deering Milliken. We have heard that one before; haven't we ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator BAYH. Greer Mill of Greer, another J. P. Stevens? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. Senator BAYH. Homelite, Greer, Textron Corp.? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. They make chain saws. Senator BAYH. Chain saws ? I don't see how you get that into the textile business. Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator BAYH. Thank you. We would like to believe that was a subsidiary which was in the textile business, but you say that outfit 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. All I know is they make Senator BAYH. Chain saws. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Chain saws. Senator BAYH. Thank you. James Fabrics, part of Burlington Industries? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know, sir. Senator BAYH. Jeffrey Manufacturing Co., part of Jeffrey Manu­facturing Co. of Ohio. Now, we have been told that there has a con­nection with the textile industry. Do you know whether that is correct 
or not ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. This plant is not in textiles, but I don't know 
what connections they might have. Senator BAYH. Jonesville Mills. Of course, Jones Mills is J. P. 
Stevens. Judge HAYNSWORTH. I believe that is right. Senator BAYH. Magnolia Finishing Plant. We have heard of that 
one before. Deering Milliken. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator BAYH. Monaghan Mill, Greenville, another J. P. Stevens ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. Senator BAYH. Mohasco Industries, a subsidiary of Mohasco Car­
pet Co. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator BAYH. Morgan Mills, the same? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know. Senator BAYH. All right. That's our information. If that is erroneous, I hope someone will come forward and tell us. Owens-Corning Fiberglas. Is that out in the textile business down there? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Glass fibers, they produce that. Some one may 
classify it as that, but it goes into boats and things like that. Senator BAYH. Pickens Mill, is that part of the Mayfair Mills chain ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator BAYH. Pratt Reed, is that part of the textile industry ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It makes metal goods that I think are sold to 
the textile industry. I think it is a supplier to the textile industry. Senator BAYH. I will skip over that Pyle National of Aiken. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Procter & Gamble. Senator BAYH. Procter & Gamble. I just skipped over that au­tomatically. I went down to the next one, which I was not at all fa­miliar with. Is that related to the textile industry. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Not as far as I know. Senator BAYH. I have no information on that. Rocky River Mill, is that part of Bigelow Carpet? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I believe it is, but I am not certain. Senator BAYH. Selma Hosiery, is that a subsidiary of Burlington 
Mills? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know, but from its name I would as­sume it is in the hosiery business. Senator BAYH. Without pursuing all of these others, I note we have been informed that Union Bleachery is part of Cones Mill, is that 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think that is correct. Senator BAYH. Victor Mills Judge HAYNSWORTH. J. P. Stevens. Senator BAYH. J. P. Stevens. And Woodside Mill. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Dan River. Senator BAYH. Dan River. Judge HAYNSWORTH. AS you have just suggested, you have skipped 
a number that are clearly not in textiles. Senator BAYH. Well, let's put them in there. There probably aren't many. Are there more than 10 ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I haven't counted them but I will be glad to. Senator BAYH. Well, let's do that because I don't want to misinter­pret this at all. Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO. 71 assume is not, Columbia Nitrogen. Senator BAYH. I have no idea what Judge HAYNSWORTH. Diehl is not. That's two. Senator BAYH. Consolidated Trim, is that? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know. Homelite is not. Jeffrey is not. Some of these, of course, I don't know. Owens-Corning I wouldn't 
say was in textiles because it produces glass fibers. Senator BAYH. Of course, we could argue that one way or the other. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator BAYH. But I am willing to say that that isn't because they 
make all sorts of different things. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Pratt Reed I would say is not. Proctor and Gamble is not. Senator BAYH. That's for sure. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Sangamo Electrical, two, plants. Neither one 
is. S.C.M. is not. These are typewriters. Shuron Optical is not. Tor­rington, two plants, is not. They make bearings. Senator BAYH. What does Torrington make? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Bearings, I think. Senator BAYH. Bearings? Judge HAYNSWORTH. One of them is said to be the bearing division. Senator BAYH. That's right. And one—the one in Clinton. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Those are the ones I can recognize as not being 
textiles. Senator BAYH. That's 12 out of 46 that we recognize as not being 
related to textiles. And I will be willing to concede that maybe a few 
others—there may be a few others in there, but we ran down a sig­nificant list that were obviously oriented to textiles in which Carolina 
Vend-A-Matic has an interest. Judge HAYNSWORTH. I suggest it is probably a fair cross section of 
the industry in the area. Senator BAYH. May I ask again: When did you become vice presi­dent of Carolina Vend-A-Matic? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Sir, I think almost at the outset. Senator BAYH. Right at the beginning. You were a director at the 
same time? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. We were all given some title. 
Senator BAYH. IS it accurate to say that there were just several vice presidents and the first vice president wasn't more important than the second or third vice president? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. And I never was listed first, second^ third, or fourth. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, again, let's touch on this matter because I would like to get it clarified. When did you, in fact, resign as vice president ? 
That's been a matter of some consternation here to some people. You did resign when ? Was it after the order of the Judicial Conference and the setting of standards? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. AS a director, yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, it was about that same time, wasn't it ? Yet, as I recall, you were carried until 1964. Judge HAYNSWORTH. AS what? Senator BAYH. AS vice president. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I don't think this is a matter of im­portance because I did nothing in that office. The record, of course* is not entirely consistent with my recollection and that of some of the other stockholders. My recollection is that I resigned when I went on the court in 1957, but the minutes for the next year and the years after that show my being reelected as vice president each year until 1964. 
Senator BAYH. I think you can understand why even a friendly sponsor might have some concern about your recollection of a 1957 oral conversation to termination and then, at regular annual intervals, the board of directors' minutes show that you are listed as a vice president and director. 
Now, I think that is a reasonable concern. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I don't question your right to be con­cerned, but I think there is no—I see no basis for concern at all in the way this concern was handled. We met at lunch. We were informal. I explained yesterday afternoon what we did when our annual meetings came on was somebody would propose to reelect the same officials, it would be passed, and somebody would carry it out, and in typing it up in detail apparently went to the minutes of the last year's meeting, and this is the way I think it happened, though I am not certain. I am speculating. 
I know we met, what we did, and the very informal way in which it was handled. So I would think this need not be an inconsistency. But in any event, if my recollection and that of my fellow stockholders was wrong about my informal resignation in 1957, that's what I think I did, that's what they think I did. 
But you accept the record. I don't think it has any effect upon the inquiry because I did not have any active duty in that office. 
Senator BAYH. I think it is fair to say, although it is probably not appropriate here, whoever was handling the records of the unofficial business certainly didn't do you a favor by continuing to list you in that capacity after the oral statements. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I don't think it reflects upon me. 
Senator BAYH. NO. I think it certainly has been a source of some embarrassment to you, to say the least. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Not in the least. Senator BAYH. Not in the least ? Very fine. When did your wife become secretary ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. In 1962, January. Senator BAYH. NOW, as I recall, yesterday you said that she had 
done routine procedures in her capacity as secretary. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator BAYH. This makes it very difficult now because in the routine 
office procedure she was the secretary, and yet neither of you were apparently aware of the fact that those records, that supposedly were in control of the secretary, listed you as a vice president, director. 
Now, I am willing to accept your statement that you were a director and vice president and that this didn't mean you had a great deal of interest in the corporation. But it is most unfortunate that we have had this inconsistency which tends to cloud the whole picture. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I don't know what I can say. My wife was concerned about a widow whom we knew who was left with no information whatever about business affairs and what went on in an office. She was intrigued by it. She wanted to know something about it. And she went out there two or three times a week and she did what she could to help in the office. This is a natural thing, and even in 1962 she was paid something for what she did. 
Senator BAYH. What sort of salary did she get? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. She got for the year, I believe it was $1,500. In 1963 she stopped doing that. She didn't get paid anything. In 1964, someone else was elected, of course, and she had no more official con­nection with it. But in 1962, she was going out to the office and doing what she could to help in the office, not every day but two or three times a week. 
As far as the minutes are concerned, I am sure she signed what was prepared and what was handed to her, and she did sign the minutes in 1962 and 1963. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, it has been disclosed, I think you disclosed it yourself, that there was a profit-sharing and pension plan that was 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. Organized by the corporation, and you had, as I recall, capacity as a trustee. Judge HAYNSWORTH. I was one of three trustees, I believe, in the 
pension fund. Senator BAYH. That started in 1961, is that correct? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I believe so. Senator BAYH. It is not important. What type of plan is it? Was this a plan to cover all those who 
were employed, or was this to have more limited accessibility to just executives, or was it for everybody ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, no; principally for the ordinary em­ployees. It did not reach directors. 
Senator BAYH. AS I recall reading some place, I don't know whether it was Dim & Bradstreet or what it was, that there were about 140 employed by Carolina Vend-A-Matic at the time that you disposed of all your interest. 
How many of these 140 were covered by the plan; do you have any idea? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I don't; I wouldn't know that we had 140 employees. Without reviewing the plan, I would not, would not know what proportion of the employees that we had were in it. But I do know this was not a plan that reached the stockholders and direc­tors as such. Dennis may have been in it. 
Senator BAYH. Did this plan envision accumulation of funds for 
later disbursement or did it distribute profits regularly? Judge HAYNSWORTH. On retirement. Senator BAYH. I am sorry? Judge HAYNSWORTH. On retirement. Senator BAYH. Sir? Judge HAYNSWORTH. TO provide income Senator BAYH. On retirement ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Bight, sir. Senator BAYH. SO this was really a retirement plan. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator BAYH. The profit-sharing part was to be distributed on 
retirement. Now, you mentioned that this didn't reach the directors. Did you 
or your wife or any of the other officers of the profit-sharing judge HAYNSWORTH. Had no interest in it. Senator BAYH. Had no interest? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator BAYH. YOU didn't? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator BAYH. YOU don't? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator BAYH. Your wife doesn't? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator BAYH. Didn't? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Didn't and doesn't. Senator BAYH. Fine. But you did have this trustee relationship, 
which, as I recall in reading the articles of incorporation of that trust, gave to the trustees a life-and-death power for determining what and how investments would be made for the fund. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. We had the right to invest the funds and keep them invested, the usual right of—that the usual rights that trus­tees of such a fund have. 
Senator BAYH. And the trustees administered the funds? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Of course, this didn't—this was so shortlived that we, as I recall, we never got into problems of dis­bursements. 
Senator BAYH. DO you still have a trustee relationship ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, no, sir. Senator BAYH. Well, you know, sometimes these pension funds, re­tirement funds and profit-sharing funds that accumulate money have a vested interest that is held even after the closing of the corporation that originally founded it. That is why I am asking the question. I am not at all trying to embarrass you. If the answer is no, then the answer is no, and that's fine. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I know what you say is true, but 
Senator BAYH. Well, no, there are some people saying: you know, the judge has an interest in that retirement fund Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do not. Senator BAYH. Even though the company was sold, the retirement 
fund is the kind of fund that goes on until retirement. Now, you say you don't have such a relationship. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I think this fund was taken over by ARA and integrated with its own plan. I don't know what happened to it afterward, but the end of my trusteeship was in 1964. 
Senator BAYH. YOU are no longer a trustee? You do not, and have not had any interest in it? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I have had nothing to do with it since then, sir. Senator BAYH. Well, I appreciate that fact very much, and I think that certainly goes to one of the matters that has been expressed. 
I think that pretty well covers all of the questions I wanted to ask you on the matter of Carolina Vend-A-Matic. Now, let me ask you to explore this whole business of canons of ethics and conflict of interest. 
As I said earlier, I think that this has been a unique case because in my judgment this is the first time in the history of the Supreme Court of the United States that we are asked to fill a vacancy that was caused by a retirement of one of the Supreme Court Justices because of some question about ethical conduct. 
I think it is only normal that this committee would be particularly concerned about ethical conduct. I hope the committee will go further and set criteria for all prospective Supreme Court Justices. 
Now, as I recall from the questioning yesterday, Senator Tydings brought out some testimony that you had made before his subcom­mittee. I quote from the transcript: 
Of course, when I went on the bench I resigned from all such business asso­ciations I had, directorships and things of that sort. The only one I retained is 
the trusteeship of this small foundation which I mentioned in my main state­ment, and I think that perhaps the best rule for a judge to go by now is stop 
doing even that much. 
Now, this was a mistake; was it not? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, yes; to the extent that I said that I re­signed from them all when I first went on the bench it was. It was correct at the time I appeared. At the time I appeared I had no directorships whatever. 
Senator BAYH. Well, could you give us, please—well, first let me just continue this line of questioning about the canons of ethics. Then I would like to have your opinion about what practice you should fol­low and have followed and, most important, will follow. 
There may or may not have been improprieties in the past. I am not prejudging that at this particular time. If there were, there is nothing we can do about that. I want to know what will happen if you are sitting on the Supreme Court. 
In the canons let me quote—and I am sure you have heard these so many times that you can probably say them in your sleep—No. 13: 
A judge should not act in any controversy where a near relative is a party; 
he should not suffer his conduct to justify the impression that any person can 
improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor, or that he is affected by the 
kinship, rank, position or influence of any party or other person. 
26: 
A judge should abstain from making personal investments in enterprises which 
are apt to be involved in litigation in the courts; and, after his accession to the 
bench, he should not retain such investments previously made, longer than a 
period sufficient to enable him to dispose of them without serious loss. It is 
desirable that he should, so far as reasonably possible, refrain from all rela­tions which normally tend to arouse the suspicion that such relations warp 
or bias his judgment, or prevent his impartial attitude of mind in the adminis­tration of his judicial duties. And 29: A judge should abstain from performing or taking part in any judicial act in 
which his personal interests are involved. If he has personal litigation in the court 
of which he is judge, he need not resign his judgeship on that account, but he 
should, of course, refrain from any judicial act in such a controversy. Now, there is 24 talking about inconsistent obligations and 25 talk­ing about business promotions and solicitations for charity. There is no need of bothering you further with this. But what is the general practice Supreme Court Justice Hayns­worth will follow in- the business of conflict of interest—in ethical conduct ? Let me phrase it that way, please. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, Senator, I can tell you what I have done as a circuit judge. I have attempted not only to comply with them but with their spirit completely. I have not sat on any case in which my former law firm was involved. I have not sat on any case in which a law firm in which a young cousin of mine is involved. I have had no occasion to step aside because I was involved in any case because I was not involved in one and none of my close rela­tions have been—close relationships have been involved. But the only context in which it has come up is in connection with where my former law firm has been involved or a law firm in which a young cousin of mine is a young partner, and I have not sat on those. I have attempted in my personal relations to be friendly with mem­bers of the bar, and I am. I have not had any close intimate relation­ship with any group, particular group of lawyers. I have not done anything to create the impression that I was on one side of any gen­eral area of controversy. And I suggest to you that I have not made or retained any investment in any concern which was likely to be involved with frequency in my court. To the extent one's own stock in a national concern may become involved in a case in my court, I have not sat except insofar as indicated by the written statement. But I don't recall instances in which I have. But one judge in my court, with agreement with the rest of the court, has sat in cases here he lias had a very minor stock interest, after the lawyers had been informed and given a chance to say whether they wished or that they would prefer he not sit. Senator BAYH. I want to go back to my original statement that I am not suggesting that you have done anything illegal. I am ex­pressing a bit of concern about the way this looks. 
And this is—the aura of fairness—has to be preserved. Judge HAYNSWORTH. By this you mean my relation with this vend­ing concern? 
Senator BATH. Well, I want to deal with that in a minute, but you brought up the interest that you owned—I suppose you were referring to the 550 shares in J.P. Stevens. Now, if there is any textile com­pany that is going to be sued and involved in litigation, it is J. P. Stevens. I don't know if it is good or bad, but I can read the record, and they are right in the middle of this controversy as far as litigation is concerned. 
I understand that on two occasions you have removed yourself from the case in question. 
But don't you think if you are really going to go forth with the type of reputation that is necessary, that you need to look at Canon 26, which states that a judge should abstain from making personal investments in enterprises which are apt to be involved in litigation in the court ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. NOW, doesn't J. P. Stevens fit into that? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, Senator, I think what this is designed to reach 
Senator BAYH. I say, please, in all fairness—excuse me for inter­rupting—if you are sitting on that court, just what are the chances that a J. P. Stevens case is coming ? You can see it, and it is going to be there. 
Now, it seems to me that this kind of ownership is asking for trouble. 
Now, excuse me for interrupting. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The provision, I think, is designed to reach the situation of a trial judge, for instance, who has frequent suits against a bus company and he should not be a stockholder in a busi­ness concern because it is up there with frequency. But when I went to the court in 1957,1 had no reason to believe that J. P. Stevens would be frequently in my court. Indeed, it had not been frequently in my court. It has been there twice, I believe, maybe three times, in connec­tion with labor relations cases. 
Senator BAYH. Judge Haynsworth, sir, please, we are not talking 
The CHAIRMAN. Let him answer. 
Senator BAYH. All right. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. And in each of those instances I had no reason to foresee that these would arise. But I suggest to you if my very small stock interest in J. P. Stevens gives me a reason to stand aside and have nothing to do with the cases when they did come up, if I divested myself of that, I had no legal reason not to sit on the case, I would still be much concerned because while I never had anything to do the Stevens' labor relations affairs, they were a very close client to me. And I would not sit, wish to sit, on a case in which they were involved, whether I owned stock or not. 
Now, it is easy enough to say I could have sold the stock, but that really doesn't solve the problem, as far as I am concerned. I would prefer not to sit on any case they had, whether I owned stock or didn't. And, of course, I haven't. And the fact I owned this stock while the outcome was pending in my courts, as far as my stock interest, it was nothing to me in the world. My stock interest was 500 shares, something of that sort. The impact of any decision in my court would be, I won't think you could compute it. It wouldn't amount to anything. And that's not the reason that I shouldn't sit, really, though it is a legal reason why I should not, and I have not. 
Senator BAYH. Past legal relationship rather than the present finan­cial ownership? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well 
Senator BAYH. It seems to me you are asking for trouble on some­thing like that. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. There is no reason in the world, Senator, that I know of, that a judge cannot sit on a case involving some client he at one time represented, or his firm did. But when you get to having close relationships over an extended period of time, at least I would very much prefer not to. 
Senator BAYH. Well, I certainly see no reason why your judgment should be the same as mine. That is not the reason for asking the ques­tion. But it seems to me that when you suggest that your 550 shares in 
J. P. Stevens is not overly significant, that we are dealing with some­thing right on point in canon 26, but you disagree. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't disagree at all. I said that I had not sat. I don't think I should sit. I just suggest with the stock ownership why I should not sit. 
Senator BAYH. Fine. I was trying to see if it wouldn't be more im­portant, as far as the canons of ethics are concerned. I can see that you are more concerned about legal relationship. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. If I sold the stock I would still have a problem: 'What should I do when a case came up ? 
Senator BAYH. In the Deering Mil liken case, the Darlington case, Judson Mill, which was a former client, was part of the Milliken com­plex. Did you consider removing yourself from that case because of the past relationships with your law firm ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Milliken, itself, I never represented. Judson Mills, which was in the complex—and if you read the opinions of the court it is a rather complex thing because individuals and groups owned stock in concerns which in turn controlled more. I don't know what the degree of control was or how it was, but somehow I under­stand Judson Mills was controlled by Milliken. And we had repre­sented them in the past, and after they acquired them we represented them to the extent of handling purely local matters requiring atten­tion of local people. We did not handle their general work, which was handled by Milliken lawyers, whoever they were. 
Senator BAYH. YOU didn't feel that your past relationship with Judson and with Milliken was significant enough that when the Lee­sona Corp. case came up in 1962 and 1963, involving Judson and Mil-liken, you should disqualify yourself from the case1? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The relation was as casual as it could be. And as I said, I never was the lawyer for Milliken. Senator BAYH. But is it not true that clear back to the beginning of 
the law firm, Judson Mills was a Haynsworth client? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This is true. 
Senator BAYH. Yet you did go ahead and sit on the Leesona-Judson 
Mills 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The real party in interest in that case, of course, was Milliken, not Judson. But even if Judson had been—there was no reason in past relations I had with Judson Mills for me not to sit on that case. 
Senator BAYH. Excuse me. Let's j>ut the record straight, then. Please put into the record why a case that is listed as Leesona Corp. v. Cotwol Manufacturing Co., Judson Mills, division of Deering Milliken Re­search Corp. isn't regarding Judson Mills ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, it is. This was a patent case. The patentee was Milliken Research, as I recall. The machine was in Judson. But usually in those cases the patentee is the real party in interest. 
Senator BAYH. I have a list of cases here that have come before you in which your law firm at one time or another has represented one of the parties. Why don't I just toss them out here and you shoot them down. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. All right, sir. 
Senator BAYH. Tell us why you felt that there was no impropriety in your sitting, and we will just get it out of the way. 
St. Paul Mercury Insurance Co. case, which I understand your law firm had represented. 
Senator HRUSKA. Would the Senator yield? 
Senator BAYH. I would be glad to. 
Senator HRUSKA. There is reference to the nominee's law firm. Per­haps that should be qualified a little bit: It is the successor of the law firm of which at one time the Judge was a member. Isn't that true? Is it contended by the Senator that he was a member of the law firm that represented St. Paul Mercury at the time he sat on the case ? 
Senator BAYH. Not whatsoever. The / . P. Stevens case came before the court and Judge Haynsworth disqualified himself, although he is not a member of the law firm. 
Senator Hruska, I would like to get this out in the open. This St. Pawl Mercury case, as I look at the timing, you had been with the law firm when that litigation started. But I make no allegations at all that you got any benefit from the law firm. I am dealing with this ethical question of when is 
Senator HRUSKA. When was the case tried? 
Senator BAYH. 1957. 
Senator HRUSKA. And had it been pending in his law firm when he was a member of the law firm ? 
Senator BAYH. It is my understanding it had. It has been alleged that it had. If that is correct, then I want to know it. And even if it had, it may be that the relationship there is too insignificant to be a critical problem.
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I don't know the case to which you refer. I don't recall it, but I am sure it was not a cause pending in my own law firm or handled by my law firm because I 'haven't sat on any cases in which my law firm was interested. 
Senator BAYH. I am not aware—I think it probably would be in­correct to make the inference that the law firm did represent that client. I would not make that inference. I am trying to see if there is some relationship between your responsibility or a judge's responsibility to disqualify himself when past relationships arise. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, let's set out—I mean my relations were past only, because I had no interest in the law firm after going on the court in 1957. But I have not thought and I don't think, I don't think it should be thought that I should not sit on cases in which casual clients of my former law firm might be involved. And I assume if you say my law firm represented St. Paul, that we did, but it was not a client that was very close to me. I owned no stock in it. I had no interest in the outcome. 
Senator BAYH. I have taken the liberty of going through the Martin-dale Hubbell records and finding those companies or corporations, those businesses that are listed in Martindale Hubbell as being rep­resented by your former law firm, and comparing that with the several cases that appeared before you, and I am willing to accept your judg­ment that there was not a sufficiently close relationship. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. 
Senator BAYII. And there is no need of proceeding further on a case by-case basis, because I am willing to accept your judgment as far as the first relationship is concerned, and I'm sure that the same relation­ship would exist in the others. 
Now, you have been quoted, and I wonder if it is accurate, that if you had that Darlington-Deering Milliken case to do over again, that you would still sit, that you would still feel that you did not have a sufficient conflict of interest. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Even if I knew at the time all that I know about it now, I would feel compelled to sit. A duty, a judge has a duty, I feel, to sit unless there is a legal reason for his not sitting. And this can achieve a major importance in a case being heard en bane. Even when it is not heard en banc, if a judge seeks to avoid sitting on a case in which there is no legal reason for him not to sit, it means the Chief Judge—and that's me—must rearrange the schedule with a departure from the random selection of panels because you can't change one case without changing something else and you can't change one panel without changing something else. And to protect the random selection of panels so that every litigant in the court, so far as we can, can be assured that the outcome of the case will not depend on any prearranged selection of the judges that are to hear it, requires that all this be held at a very minimum. And we have sought to do that. 
Senator BAYH. YOU would do it over again. I admire your tenacity. I am not sure I concur in the judgment, but then that's 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It is not tenaciousness, sir. But it is a judge's duty to serve unless there is a legal reason that he shouldn't serve. And I may suggest that the judges in the Federal system have been a coura­geous group on the whole. They have sat on unpopular cases. They have sat on cases where many of them would have given anything in the world if they could have avoided it and where a lax rule would permit them to avoid sitting. 
And I think judges like that should be encouraged and they should not be made to feel that they ought to be limited. 
Senator BAYH. Did Darlington know you were on that 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Sir ? 
Senator BAYH. Did Darlington know you were on the board at the time that case was held ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. On the board of the vending concern? Senator BAYH. Vending concern. Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Senator BAYH. YOU mentioned yesterday that, as I recall, in re­sponse to Senator Tydings' question: When was the first time there was any public knowledge or awareness that you were an investor or stockholder in Carolina Vend-A-Matic?—your answer: "I don't think that became known until after this appointment. It became known to the people involved in the lawsuit, of course, in December 1963." 
Now, either this is true or what you just said. There is a little con­flict there. Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't understand, sir. Senator COOK. Will the Senator yield ? Senator ERVIN. I submit, Mr. Chairman, he said it hadn't been pub­
licly known until after he was appointed. But he said it became known to the people involved in the lawsuit back in 1963 when Miss Patricia Eames communicated to Judge Sobeloff, the chief judge of the fourth circuit, what turned out to be a totally unfounded rumor. 
Senator COOK. I think this is in the record. Senator BAYH. I think the allegations of bribery that were made to Judge Sobeloff have been proven adequately incorrect. 
Senator ERVIN. Yes; and I think Attorney General Kennedy, who was a very brilliant person, had all of the facts before him at the time that he made the statement that the facts showed that the charge of bribery and the allegation of a conflict of interest were absolutely un­founded and he wrote a letter in which he said he had complete con­fidence in Judge Haynsworth. 
Senator BAYH. And he based this Senator KENNEDY. Would the Senator yield? Senator BAYH. Let me just pursue this one point. He based it on 
a letter of Judge Sobeloff. And in reading Judge Sobeloff's letter I 
have had no inclination to find, or no indication that the judge The CHAIRMAN. YOU better read it again. Senator ERVIN. It's got all the facts. The CHAIRMAN. It does raise a question, in fairness to this nominee. Senator BAYH. I have read it, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. It does raise a question of conflict of interest. Senator ERVIN. I have to say what Phillip said to the Ethiopians : 
"Understandeth what thou readeth." Senator KENNEDY. Would the Senator yield ? Senator BAYH. Let me just pursue this one point. Does the chairman find in the Sobeloff letter—and he has had a 
chance to study it a great deal more than I—the fact that Judge Haynsworth claimed a half million dollars in Vend-A-Matic? 
The CHAIRMAN. I think the question of conflict of interest was raised in the Sobeloff letter, and I think it was raised in Miss Eames' letter. The letters are part of the record. They will speak for them­selves. 
Yes; I think that. Senator KENNEDY. Will the Senator yield ? Senator BAYH. I yield. Senator KENNEDY. I think we can clear it up. Mr. Duffner is here. 
He is familiar with that case. I have had a chance to review the file 
on it, and it is certainly my impression from reviewing the file that 
the only question that was brought up to Judge Sobeloff, the basis of 
the allegation of Patricia Eames was a criminal violation, whether a 
criminal violation had occurred because of the alleged "throwing" 
of the contracts. 
In reading 
The CHAIRMAN. I think the 
Senator KENNEDY. Would the Senator permit me to continue ? 
The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me. 
Senator KENNEDY. Nowhere either in the allegation that was raised 
by Patricia Eames or in Judge Sobeloff's records or comments did 
they ever reach the question about the initial propriety of Judge 
Haynsworth sitting on that case. And if any of my distinguished col­
leagues can find that within the record, then I would like to hear that 
now, because I have not seen that. And we have Mr. Duffner here, who 
is from the Justice Department, who can respond. 
We can look. 
The matter that came to the Justice Department was sent to the 
Criminal Division, referred to the Criminal Division of the Justice 
Department for the investigation of any criminal liability. It did 
not come before the Attorney General on a preexisting conflict of in­terest. 
Senator HRUSKA. Would the Senator yield? 
The matter was referred to the Criminal Division, and properly 
so, because the text of 28 U.S.C. 455 has to do with that, and it re­
quires a judge to disqualify himself in a case in which he has a sub­stantial interest, and so forth. 
However, Judge Sobeloff's letter clearly indicates in the first two paragraphs that he is treating as completely unfounded the charge of bribery or corruption in connection with the award of contracts. Then he proceeds for the balance of the several page letter to devote himself to the task of describing the stockholdings of the nominee, and the fact of his resignation from these boards of directors long before any court rule was established requiring that that be done. 
He arrives at the general conclusion that the court, having all of these facts in reference upon which any possible conflict of interest could be based, has declared itself as having full confidence in Judge Haynsworth. 
Now, I doubt very much that when the record of stock ownership and the membership on the board of directors and all of these other things are so plainly evident to the members of the court as well as to the Department of Justice, that the Department would say: "Wait a minute. We are not going to deal with anything but Miss Eames' charge that there was corruption and bribery." 
When they take charge of a case for the purpose of determining the violation of a statute on conflict of interest because of a substantial interest in a case and a failure to disqualify they take charge of it for all purposes. To deny that would put the argument on the basis of a narrow legalistic proposition: A charge of bribery was made; it was dismissed; and that's all. 
That's not true interpretation. And the full import of all of that record will clearly substantiate it. It was the basis of the memorandum which the chairman and this Senator issued and which is in the record. That conclusion is based upon a full and complete and fair consideration of the record. 
Senator ERVIN. And I would like to add Senator KENNEDY. We have The CHAIRMAN. Would the Senator yield ? Senator KENNEDY. Would the Senator yield ? I think I still have The CHAIRMAN. I say, will you yield ? Senator KENNEDY. Well, I would just like to respond to this 
question. 
The letter that the Senator from Nebraska refers to does not state what he alleges is a part of the record. It is two paragraphs long and I will read it at this time. 
Dear Mr. Attorney General: Enclosed is the file of correspondence passing between our court and counsel 
for the Textile Workers Union of America and Deering Milliken Corporation 
following the argument of an appeal in our court. Inasmuch as this relates to 
alleged conduct of one of our colleagues, we think it appropriate to pass the 
file on to the Department of Justice. In that record—and I cease reading the letter from Mr. Sobeloff— or in that letter, there are the charges on page 3 from Patricia Eames of whether or not a criminal violation has occurred, and in reading through the record what was suggested based upon the anonymous phone call is that as a result of this decision, that the vending contract was thrown to Carolina Vend-A-Matic. And you just can't get away from that, and I will stand by this record: We think it appropriate to pass the file on to the Department of Justice. 
Happily, Miss Eames, who wrote the initial letter to the court on December 
17, 1963, has herself acknowledged that the assertions and insinuations about 
Judge Haynesworth, made to her by some anonymous person in a telephone call, 
are without foundation; but I wish to add on behalf of the members of the court 
that our independent— 
and once again the telephone call came on the basis of the "throwing" of the contract and it is all the way through this file— are without foundation; but I wish to add on behalf of the members of the court 
that our independent investigation has convinced us that there is no warrant 
whatever for these assertions and insinuations, and we express our complete 
confidence in Judge Haynesworth. 
The only point that we have raised both by Judge Sobeloff's letter, which is a part of the record, and is very clear and available to all of us—is that the question that was reached—and I think we have Mr. Duffner here who was in the Department of Justice at the time and can clear up this matter if there is any open question—that the ques­tion that was reached was about the criminal liability if the contract was "thrown." I don't see any place within the assertions by the Attor­ney General at that time that in any way it reached the question of the propriety or the ethical question about Judge Haynesworth's originally sitting on that case. 
I don't believe that it was raised. And I don't believe that the ques­tion was reached. Senator ERVIN. Will the Senator yield? The CHAIRMAN. The Attorney General said that he had complete 
confidence in Judge Haynesworth. I do not believe that Attorney Gen­eral Kennedy would have made such a statement had he thought there had been a conflict of interest. 
Senator KENNEDY. Well, I read that same file and I am completely confident that there was no criminality involved in it, and I share Attorney General Kennedy's expression as well as Mr. Sobeloff's ex­pression of complete confidence in Judge Haynesworth. 
The CHAIRMAN. There was no criminality involved in it and no 
conflict of interest. Senator KENNEDY. That's not—where does it say that? Senator ERVIN. Well, I can tell you. If you yield to me, I will show 
you. Senator KENNEDY. NO, I am yielding to—I am asking The CHAIRMAN. That's the meaning of the letter the Attorney Gen­eral wrote, and above it, above it in the file it had the initials. Senator ERVIN. If the Senator will yield, I will show where the 
question was put. The CHAIRMAN. All right. Senator KENNEDY. If you stand up, does it help Senator ERVIN. I will tell the Senator from Massachusetts I always 
stand up, even when I am sitting down. 
This whole investigation was set in motion by a letter of December 17,1963, written by Miss Patricia Eames to Judge Sobeloff, the Chief Judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals. After setting forth this rumor which had been conveyed to her by an anonymous telephone call charg­ing bribery, she wrote the three-page letter, and she put this in the closing paragraph: 
We believe that an investigation should be made immediately. We do not know 
whether we ourselves should ask the Justice Department to investigate or whether 
we should leave the handling of this matter entirely up to you. It is clear to us 
that you are the first person to whom the matter should be referred. Now, here are the words I invite attention to: Whether or not a criminal violation has occurred, we certainly believe that if 
the Deering Milliken contract was thrown to Carolina Vend-A-Matic, Judge 
Haynsworth should be disqualified from participating in the decision in this 
case, and that the resulting two-to-two decision should lead to the sustaining 
of the NLRB decision below. 
Now, so this statement coupled with the acknowledgement that Judge Haynsworth was a vice president of Carolina Vend-A-Matic contained earlier in the letter, conveyed the alleged criminal charge and also the charge of a conflict of interest. And that was investigated by Judge Sobeloff, and Judge Sobeloff sent a copy of a letter, wrote a letter on December 18, 1964, which is contained in the Department of Justice file. In the letter, Judge Haynsworth reviews all of these facts about Judge Haynsworth 
The CHAIRMAN. Let's have order. 
Senator ERVIN. In connection with Carolina Vend-A-Matic, and he closed with a statement that "However unwarranted the allegation"—this is the first allegation—"since the propriety of the conduct of a member of this court has been questioned"—and it is questioned in two respects 
Senator KENNEDY. Does it say two respects ? Senator ERVIN. NO, but I interpolate it was a question in two re­spects: First, whether there was evidence of a bribe and, second, 
whether there had been impropriety by reason, of Judge Haynsworth 
holding office in Carolina Vend-A-Matic. Senator BAYH. Will the Senator yield ? Senator ERVIN. Not yet; wait until I finish this. 
However unwarranted the allegation, since the propriety of the conduct of a 
member of this court has been questioned, I am today, at Judge Haynsworth's 
request and with the concurrence of the entire court, sending the file to the 
Department of Justice, together with an expression of our full confidence in 
Judge Haynsworth. He sent the whole file, including Patricia Eames' letter stating that he ought to disqualify himself, irrespective of the other charge, the main charge. This was considered in the Department of Justice and a very brilliant Attorney General of the United States, Robert F. Kennedy, after getting this file and Judge Sobeloff's, the file from Judge Sobeloff, he says— DEAR MB. CHIEF JUDGE : This will acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 
February 19, 1964, enclosing the file that reflects your investigation of certain 
assertions and insinuations about Judge Clement F. Haynsworth, Jr. And I pause to interpolate that one of those assertions was that he should be disqualified by reason of his holding office in Carolina 
Vend-A-Matic. Then he concludes with this paragraph: Your thorough and complete investigation reflects that the charges were 
without foundation. I share your expression of complete confidence in Judge 
Haynsworth.
Thanks for bringing this matter to my attention. 
Sincerely, ROBERT F. KENNEDY, Attorney General. Both things were brought to his attention. The CHAIRMAN. Gentlemen, we will go over to 2:30.
 
The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order. 
Senator COOK. Mr. Chairman, could I ask the indulgence of the members of the committee for just about 5 minutes? I have an appoint­ment at HUD with my mayor and a few other people, and it is really important, and I would like to get one point into the record, one ques­tion, if it is agreeable with the members of the committee. 
Senator BATH. It is agreeable with me. The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead. Senator COOK. Thank you. Judge, there is one question I want to ask you right at this point 
because I think it is important in regard to the interrogation which was going on just prior to our leaving, and I preface it with this: First of all, because apparently we are going on strict constructionism, as the Senator from Michigan was discussing this morning, because we are taking this record and giving it a very strict constructive point and no more. 
Secondly, the point I would like to make is obviously the Textile Workers Union of America must have been totally and completely sat­isfied with the report that was made and with Judge Sobeloff's report and the Attorney General's report because they made no motion for a new trial in the Fourth Circuit on the grounds we are now discussing, they made no mention of it in their motion for certiorari or the petition for certiorari in the Supreme Court of the United States, and made no mention of it at any time whatsoever, and on this basis, Judge, do you feel that this committee or the Senate as a whole is bound by the Sobeloff investigation or by the action of the Justice Department in 1964? 
 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, I do not, sir, though I think what was done is important in fixing the context of the thing at the time. 
The members of my court, of course, knew of my stock interest in Vend-a-Matic. I do not recall that I told them with precision that it was a one-seventh, but they knew I was one of a small group which owned it, and there is no fact that has been brought out since that was not known by the judges of my court at the time. I think if they thought there was any impropriety in my sitting they would have said so and they would not have written as they did to the Department of Jus­tice. And I think it is important, too, in showing my reaction to the accusation at the time it came, that I was not content with an out of hand rejection. I wanted the facts developed at the time, and after it was done I wanted the whole thing submitted to the Department. These, I think, help to set the context. 
But as far as foreclosing inquiry in the Senate, I do not think so. Indeed the question having been raised I want the Senate to pass on the merits. And my position is that if a hundred judges and a hundred bishops and everybody else swore in 1964 that I had committed no impropriety whatsoever, the question is before this Senate and I want the judgment of this Senate. I may say that while I am concerned about myself and my reputation, I much more am concerned about my country and the Supreme Court as an institution, and if there is sub­stantial doubt about the propriety of what I did and my fitness to sit on the Supreme Court, then I hope the Senate will resolve the doubt against me. If there is no substantial doubt, I hope the thing can be laid aside so that the Supreme Court can serve, with me on it if I am there, as it should serve, as an institution deserving the respect of the people. So that I implore the committee itself, and the Senate itself, to consider what was done in 1964 in the context in which it was done, but not to feel foreclosed at all from reaching the merits of this matter and exercising its own judgment on the propriety of what I did. 
Senator COOK. Thank you, Judge, and thank you, gentlemen, Mr. Chairman. 
The CHAIRMAN. Gentlemen, could we have a short executive session. 
The CHAIRMAN. NOW, Judge, there are a number of witnesses who have appointments who are here now, who were here a week ago to testify but the hearings were canceled due to the death of Senator Dirksen. We have decided to take certain of those witnesses now, both on your side, and I have agreed to hear Mr. Meany tomorrow after­noon, whether you are through testifying or not. We are going to take these witnesses but I want you to hold yourself ready so that at the conclusion of that testimony you can go back on the stand. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I will be at your beck and call, sir. 
The CHAIRMAN. The witnesses we are going to call are from out of town. I do not think—I would like to get through with them before I call the Washington witnesses. 
Mr. Frank? 
Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, just before the first witness comes this afternoon, I would like to, if I could, make a very brief statement in terms of perspective, the debate which was underway when we re­cessed this morning, if I could do this at this point of the record today. There is no necessity for the judge to remain here. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. If I may be excused. 
Senator KENNEDY. Just prior to the first witnesses this afternoon. 
First let me say that I do not feel it is extremely important or rele­vant to us here now to decide exactly what the Justice Department in 1964 said or meant to say about the allegation against Judge Hayns­worth. Even if they had done a thorough investigation and had explic­itly cleared the judge of every conceivable legal or ethical violation, we would not be foreclosed from reexamining the matter now and making up our own minds. The only reason for going into this collat­eral debate now is that some people have tried to advertise Attorney General Kennedy's letter for something it was not. Judge Haynsworth himself was quoted by the Associated Press as saying that he thought his actions were and I begin to quote now, "entirely proper. I wouldn't have done it if I thought otherwise. The judges in my court thought it proper and Robert Kennedy thought so." 
Two members of this committee have issued a press release assert­ing that the Justice Department considered all aspects of Judge Haynsworth's conduct, including the question of judicial ethics and conflict of interest, and that Judge Haynsworth was absolved of any misconduct. 
Now these statements not only are not accurate—they could not be accurate, for my understanding of the practice of the Department of Justice at that time is as follows: if any question of judicial behavior was referred by anyone to the Department, the matter was referred in all cases to the chief judge of the court involved, unless there was some problem of a criminal violation. The questions of ethics and canons were left solely to the courts themselves in due respect to the proper separation and distribution of powers and responsibilities among the branches of the Federal Government. The fact is that if any questions of judicial ethics or the canons had come before the Depart­ment in some proper way, as for example in the form of proposed legislation, the division primarily responsible—as we have seen in the instance of Mr. Rhenquist's letter—would have been the Office of Legal Counsel. 
Now if we look at the file, as placed in the Congressional Record for September 10, 1969, at page S10394, we can see exactly what hap­pened. Judge Sobeloff sent the Department his file which, he said, had convinced the complainant that her "assertions and allegations about Judge Haynsworth were without foundation" and had persuaded the judges of the 4th circuit that "there is no warrant whatever for these assertions and allegations." Now the distinguished Senator Ervin and I have both read the relevant sections of Miss Eames' letter but let me do so again: 
Depending on a number of facts which we do not know but which could be discovered by an investigation with subpoena powers, there may or may not be violations of 18 U.S.C. Sections 201 and 202. It would appear, however, that only one fact which is now unknown—namely, whether or not the Deering Milliken contract was thrown to Carolina Vend-a-matic—needs to be known in order to conclude that Judge Haynsworth should have disqualified himself from participating in this decision. 
And again: Whether or not a criminal violation has occurred, we certainly believe that if the Deering Milliken contract was thrown to Carolina Vend-a-matic, Judge Haynsworth should be disqualified for participating in the decision in this case. 
It is important to note that the only fact tying Judge Haynsworth to Vend-a-Matic alleged by the informant and suggested by Miss Eames was that the judge was a vice president of the firm. And in the entire correspondence I have seen no indication that Miss Eames knew or that Judge Sobeloff knew or that the other judges knew or that the Department of Justice knew that Judge Haynsworth was a founder of Vend-a-Matic, that he continued to hold a one-seventh interest in the firm until 1964, that that interest was worth nearly half a million dollars, that he may have continued to assist in obtaining financing for the firm while he was on the court, that he himself was personally liable on corporate debt in the amount of perhaps several hundred thousand dollars, all facts which have only come to light recently. Nor could they have known of a fact which only came to light this morning, namely that all except 10 or 12 of the 46 major clients of Carolina Vend-a-Matic were involved in the textile industry, for which, as our colleague has pointed out, the Darlington case raised extremely im­portant issues. Let me say that I have not made up my mind as to the relevance and impact of all these facts, but I do know that they were not known to or passed on by the fourth circuit or the Justice Depart­ment in 1964. The court and the department were focused on a simple allegation—that Deering Milliken vending contracts were "thrown" to a company of which Judge Haynsworth was a vice president, and therefore the Judge was either guilty of a violation of the bribery statutes or at least had to disqualify himself after the "throwing" of those contracts. The allegation appeared untrue, and therefore the suggested course of action was not called for. It is as simple as that. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Senator ERVIN. I would just like to point out the question of ethics was also before Judge Sobeloff, Judge Sobeloff and the court, and he passed on the question on the record to show the ownership of this stock in Carolina Vend-a-Matic, but I agree with the first suggestion you made that whether they passed on this question or not, it does not relieve us of the duty to pass on it. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Mr. Chairman, most of what I know of, of course, has been told by Judge Winter and Mr. McCall. I can fill in a little bit from the point of view of what I know. As Judge Winter explained this morning when he was on the stand, we heard this case November 10, 1967. 
At that time I owned no stock in either party. I had no financial interest whatever in it. There was no reason in the world that I should not sit. I knew nothing about the stock of Brunswick. 
We conferred immediately after the case was heard. There was no doubt in the mind of either one of the three as to what the result should be. Indeed, we thought it rather a fruitless appeal. We thought it should be decided on the basis of a very brief order. 
We talked in terms of doing that that very day. Just as an aside, Senator Cook spoke about what was involved. Of course, there were some substantial amounts mentioned. There were liens in very old used bowling equipment, the worth of which I do not know. One fel­low said $2,000, another person said maybe 10, but the dispute was about the competing liens, and the landlord has been given a pre­ferred lien for the rent which was accrued. 
Pie claimed, of course, that he should have been allowed a lien for unaccrued rent. Later the building was released to somebody else and he got his rent for the unaccrued period, but he wanted it twice, and there was no doubt in our minds he was not entitled to it, wanted it twice insofar as the worth of this equipment is concerned. 
We decided that we would not summarily affirm that afternoon, because the district judge had used some language that we were not prepared to endorse, and because of that, we thought we should write out our own opinion. The opinion was assigned to Judge Winter to write, and at that point I was done with what work I had to do on the case and I passed on to others, and I put this one out of my mind. 
I may explain here that we work in very concentrated fashion in cases when they are before us. Senator Ervin, from your experience as a judge, I know you know what you do, and when you make up your mind it is done and you are through with that case and you go on to something else. 
We had a great press of cases, of course, at that time. We still do. And you move as quickly as you can to something else. When you are done with one you lay it aside mentally as well as physically. 
Some 6 weeks after that, I had sold some insurance securities stock. In my own records I do not find a sale on the 5th. I am sure Mr. McCall is right. Four hundred shares were sold in the last of Novem­ber, on the 30th, but 1,500 shares were sold on December 15, and this was the burden of the funds that I had available for investment. 
Shortly before the Brunswick stock was purchased, Mr. McCall recommended that these funds that I had for reinvestment be invested in Brunswick. I do not remember a great many of the details of the stock. I do remember his informing me that it was making any num­ber of things that he thought should turn out well. 
One I do remember was the outboard motors made by Mercury. I told him all right, go ahead, and he wont ahead. I have no way to precisely fix the date. It was shortly before the 26th when the order was executed. 
His notes indicate that it was December 15, and I suppose that is correct. Apparently the order was executed on December 26, because I received a statement from him on the 27th. The statement is dated the 26th. And my secretary, she does not like an unpaid bill lying around 1 minute, she promptly drew a check. 
The first time I saw the report the check was attached. I signed it on the 27th. It was returned to him and I presume he received it on the 28th. 
The case that we had, of course, did not enter my mind at the time. If it had been in my mind I would not have bought the stock. I did not check the cases that had been heard in my court and were not disposed of. I think I should have in the course of buying a stock. Afterwards, this is a precaution I would take. I did not take advantage of it then and, of course, I am very sorry I did not. But the fact that there was a case that I heard 6 weeks earlier, and I will say as far as I was concerned I was done with it, did not enter my mind when Mr. McCall suggested that funds I had be invested in this stock. I said all right, and it was so invested. 
Just for the record, if anyone wants it, I received certificates on the stock. They are dated the 15th of the next month. I received them on the 20th of January 1968, and they are here if anyone wants to see them. 
The next time, of course, that the case entered my mind was when I received the proposed opinion from Judge Winter. At that stage, I realized it had not been completely disposed of, and at that time I thought what I should do. I had now become a stockholder. 
My conclusion was that I should endorse it since Judge Winter had written an opinion precisely as we had agreed, since Judge Jones concurred, since no one had any doubt about it, and nothing else oc­curred to return the case to the discussion stage. Now, it does occur sometimes, as was brought out from Judge Winter, that when an opinion is assigned to a judge for a number of reasons he may change his view. 
This may be the result of something he found in the record of which we were not aware. It may be the result of some research he did in his library to bring out some point that we were not aware of, were not fully appreciative of, and the case then reverts to the conference stage. It goes back for a brand new, fresh viewpoint. That happens now and then, not with great frequency but it does occur. 
Nothing of the sort occurred in this instance. If it had occurred, I would have gotten myself out. Indeed I would not only have gotten myself out, I would have gotten Judge Winter out and Judge Jones, because if I was not qualified to sit in this case, I had conferred with them and if it was wrong for me to be in, it was wrong for them to be in it, so I would have gotten all three out and the case would have been set to be reheard before three new judges. 
As against that, I thought that really the decision had been made in November, long before I knew anything about Brunswick stock or became a stockholder, and in the interest of judicial efficiency, I should go on and endorse my name on the opinion as approving what we had agreed upon, as approving it as an expression of what we had agreed upon back in November. 
That, of course, I did. I do not think that was acting in a strictly judicial capacity at the time because it was merely an affirmation of what we had agreed upon some, well, 8 weeks earlier. 
As I say, Judge Winter said that he would not have bought this stock and I agree with him completely. I would not have bought it either if I had been aware of the fact that this case that we had heard in November had not been disposed of. Afterward I saw no reason why I should not proceed as I did in light of the circumstances and the fact that there was no reversion of this case ever to the conference stage. So I signed it and that was that. 
I do not think under the circumstances that under the statute, I did not think then, I do not think now, that what I did in the decision al process in that case was done while I had any interest whatever in the case or in its outcome. 
The CHAIRMAN. I hear you are a big stockholder in the C. & O. Rail­road. Tell us about your Chesapeake and Ohio stock. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I own no C. & O. stock. Senator Bayh asked about it. It is true that on my joint income tax return with my wife there may be some reference to a dividend on C. & O. stock. 
Last year, Mr. Chairman, my wife had a friend who attended a stockholders' meeting of the C. & O. at the Greenbriar, where they have them and they invite all the stockholders to come at their own expense, by the way, not at the expense of the C. & O., and my wife thought it might provide an excuse to entice me away for a long weekend. 
If we received an invitation from the C. & O. to attend the stock­holders' meeting at the Greenbriar, even though it was at my expense, she thought 
Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, If I could interrupt, Judge, I com­pletely understand why your wife would like to entice you to the Greenbriar. Mine likes it too. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. YOU know. So she went down and bought 10 shares of C. & O. stock. She paid $641 for it, and squirreled it away in the hope that some time she would receive an invitation to go to that stockholders' meeting with which she could confront me. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. I did not understand how much she spent, how much she paid? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. $641. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Bought $641 worth? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Ten shares. This included commissions, taxes, stamps and whatever else goes into it. And she squirreled it away, in the hope that she could induce me, upon receipt of the stockholders' notice, to take her for a long weekend to the Greenbriar. 
The CHAIRMAN. That is 10 shares ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Ten shares. And after that, to complete it, I sat on a case involving the C. & O. 
Senator ERVIN. If I may inject myself at this point, I have been invited several times to go out to the Greenbriar and make speeches to several organizations and in every case my wife just laid the law down to me and told me I had to go. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I like it, too. I do not blame them. Incidentally, I told someone my wife is like most wives, Senator Ervin. As a result of the marital relation that we have, she understands completely that what is mine is hers and what is hers is hers, too, and these 10 shares were hers, and she controlled them. But since the question has been raised, I did sit on a case involving C. & O. It was a seaman's claim for injuries. He had been sent in to clean a space where a lot of grease had been and he was sent in to clean it up. He slipped on a grease spot. The district judge said he had no right to claim that the ship was un­seaworthy by reason of the grease that he was supposed to clean up. 
He appealed to my court and we held that yes, he was entitled to the claim and we sent it back to the district judge to find the extent of his damage. 
The CHAIRMAN. YOU decided against the C. & O. ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The C. & O., except it came back because after lie went back and the district judge made an award he was not happy with that and he appealed and claimed more. Of course, we get ap­peals sometimes from people who say that the jury or the judge awarded too much or too little, and these do not, very frequently, get much attention in the court, because we all have a very high regard for the jury and what it does when it fixes its award. 
So it came back up with a very brief order. We denied the appeal, when he complained about the amount of the award, but it was cer­tainly adverse to the railroad to the extent that he got anything. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. I do not recall the date of the decision. I did not hear you a while ago. What was the date of the decision in the Brunswick case, the date that you made your decision ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It was heard and decided as far as the sub­
stance was concerned on November 10,1967. Senator MCCLELLAN. November 10. When was this stock purchased? Judge HAYNSWORTH. The stock was purchased, ordered on De­cember 26,1967. Senator MCCLELLAN. December 26 ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. 1967. Senator MCCLELLAN. Was that the date that it was ordered? Judge HAYNSWORTH. This is the date that the transaction was ex­ecuted on the New York Stock Exchange. Senator MCCLELLAN. That is the date it was actually purchased ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Actually purchased. Senator MCCLELLAN. That would be 36 days after the case was 
heard and you had made the decision? Judge HAYNSWORTH. More than that I believe, from the 10th of November to the 26th of December would be more than 36 days. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. It would be 46 days. At the time you decided the case, on the day you heard the arguments, I understand immedi­ately thereafter the court went into conference or whatever you call it? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. Senator MCCLELLAN. The three judges, you and the other two dis­
cussed the merits of the case, and immediately decided it ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. I understood you to say a while ago that you 
all thought alike, all three of you—that it was kind of a fruitless 
appeal. Judge HAYN; WORTH. It was. Senator MCCLELLAN. Did you mean by that that it was groundless, 
that there was really no merit in the appeal? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. Was there any controversy in your delibera­tions about it ? Were any of the three of you inclined to "hold the other 
way? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO. Senator MCCLELLAN. From the beginning of your deliberations ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Not one of the three had the slightest doubt in 
the world. Senator MCCLELLAN. Am I correct that the decision was appealed ? 
Or rather a writ of certiorari was denied by the Supreme Court ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, it was. Senator MCCLELLAN. Evidently confirming what the three judges 
had found, at least that there was not any grounds for appeal ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, they say that the denial of certainty does not always mean that, but they did decline to review it. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. I see. Now let me ask you. This I think cer­tainly would be vital and would be most important if true. At the time this case was heard, and at the time the three of you made this unanimous decision, did you have in mind then any suggestion that you would buy Brunswick stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. None whatever. Senator MCCLELLAN. Had you ever heard of such a thing at that time? I mean could you have possibly at that time foreseen that days later a suggestion might be made to you by your broker to invest 
in that particular stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I could not. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. DO you know, can you say whether you would 
have ever bought or ever become interested in it on the date which it was purchased, December 26, or any time thereafter, except and unless your broker, Mr. McCall, might have suggested to you? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I would not. Being a judge is a full-time job. I have no time to keep up with stock investments and any opinions as to what might be appropriate or what might not be, or what might be wise to buy or not. I am completely dependent upon the advice of somebody else about it. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. In other words, there was no initiative on your part, no initial decision on your part to seek to purchase this particular stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. ISTO, sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. It was on the advice and the suggestion of the stockbroker who had been representing you in trying to help you invest your funds? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is quite correct. I am not in business. I have no reason to know anything about what might be a good stock buy or what might not be one. It is simply a case when for some reason I had some funds to invest, I would consult the broker and I take his advice. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. One other question. Had you not had those surplus funds, or what we might call reinvestment funds, accumulate by reason of selling some stock on which you took a loss, is there any reason to think that your broker may have suggested to you the pur­chase of this stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Without those funds, if he had made a sug­gestion, I would have said I have no funds at this time. I am not interested. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. SO this was simply a reinvestment of funds 
from stocks you sold ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is right. Senator MCCLELLAN. That were not proving profitable ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. IS that correct ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. This particular investment has not proven 
to be unduly profitable, has it ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir, it has not. Many do not. Senator MCCLELLAN. Sir? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Many do not. 
_ Senator MCCLELLAN. I do not quite understand why when the mo­tion came up for a rehearing, why it did not occur to you at that time that possibly you had this stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I was aware of the fact that I did when that came up, sir. Here though at that time I was a stockholder, there was nothing I could do to wipe out the fact that I had been a stockholder during the time this case was in court. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. It is understandable when you made the de­cision that you did not have Brunswick in mind. There was no reason then as your testimony in the record shows, as far as I know, for you to have contemplated that you would purchase this particular stock, but I am wondering what was the proper course for you to pursue, if and when a motion for reconsideration came up, a rehearing. You could not undo the other. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is right. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Was it a matter of the case—had certiorari by that time already been denied ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. At the time you considered the motion for 
rehearing, then certiorari had been denied by the Supreme Court. Was there any question of the other judges as to whether rehearing should be granted? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. None at all. If there had been I would have granted a new hearing and brought in three new judges if anyone had the slightest doubt about it. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. I can understand that some question may be raised and some criticism might be directed at you, for not having dis­qualified yourself on the motion for rehearing, but on the decision of the case, I do not see how you can be criticized. You had no intimation then—there was nothing to suggest—you could not possibly know what you were going to do 6 weeks from then. I do not know whether you knew at that time that your investment, your insurance stock would be sold or not. Did you know that it was going to be sold ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This was early in November. No, sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. At the time this decision was made ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Did you know then that your stock was going to be sold—that you were going to accumulate these investment funds? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did not, no sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. If I understand you correctly, you are testify­ing that generally with respect to your funds, you do not have time to give them the personal attention to go out and seek investments, and you therefore rely upon your long-time friend and broker, who helped you follow your accounts and keep your investments sound and profitable ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do rely on him, sir. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. He was asked a question, I believe, whether you had ever or whether you always followed his advice. I think he said he could not be sure, but he felt confident that in the majority of instances you did. Do you want to comment on that ? I am trying to find out how much you have relied on him, over what period of time, and whether this whole thing was simply routine, and that there was a development afterward that has given rise to this issue here today ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, it was routine. I do not recall ever having rejected advice that he gave, except to this extent, that if he would tell me that he thought it would be a good thing to buy ABC stock, I well might say, "Arthur, I simply do not have any funds to invest now," and this would be to that extent a rejection. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. There may have been times when he suggested that you invest in a given stock, when you felt like your current cash account would not justify it, is that correct? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir; but if I had funds to invest, and he 
made a recommendation, I go to him because I think he knows a great deal more about such things than I do. Senator MCCLELLAN. What I mean by that is you were generally 
relying on his counsel ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. With respect to trying to keep your funds 
invested? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. Have you ever, do you recall having ever ini­
tiated an investment with him yourself, going to him of your own initiative and saying, "Buy me some of this stock," or "Buy me some of that" ? Do you recall whether you have ever done that? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Certainly not anything like that, sir. I may have made some inquiry sometime of him about something of which I had heard. I cannot say that I have not. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. YOU might have consulted him—you might 
have inquired of him if he knew about this or that ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MCCLELLAN. All right, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. YOU were asked about MGIC stock. What is MGIC 
stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This I understand to refer to MGIC Invest­ment Co., which was in the news quite some years back, long before I had anything to do with it. Senator Rollings was the moving spirit in forming a small concern in my State known as Guaranty Invest­ment Trust, and I bought some stock in that Guaranty Investment Trust. 
A year or so ago, in a stock exchange, the stock of the Guaranty In­vestment Trust was acquired by MGIC Investment, and I then became a holder of MGIC stock. It came completely through this Guaranty Investment Trust. 
Senator COOK. Mr. Chairman, may I put into the record if I may. Judge Haynsworth, that you acquired 3,000 shares of Guaranty Insur­ance Trust on August 13, 1964, and those 3,000 shares on merger were traded for 630 shares of MGIC ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think that is correct, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. Judge, as I understand the facts, they are these: On the 10th day of November 1967 you and Judge Winter and Dis­trict Judge Woodrow Wilson Jones constituted a panel before whom this case we call the Brunswick case came ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator ERVIN. And it was from the legal standpoint a very simple 
case for you to decide ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. We had no doubt about it. Senator ERVIN. And so, all three of you came to the conclusion that 
the landlord was entitled to a priority of rent as against these remain­ing assets up to the time of the tenant vacating the landlord's premises, but that thereafter the landlord had no priority of rent. Therefore, the conditional seller or the chattel mortgagor was entitled to have its claim satisfied as far as it could be satisfied out of the remaining assets after the landlord's claim was settled ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. 
Senator ERVIN. And you never at any time since then have had any doubt about the soundness of the way you voted on November 10, 1967, to decide this case? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir; and I am told even the lawyer for the landlord agreed with us. 
Senator ERVIN. Yes. Now, after that time, Judge, the result of the decision which you voted to sustain on that day was identical as far as the result of the decision was concerned with what Judge Robert W. Hemphill, the district judge who tried the case, had decided? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator- ERVIN. And then after that, Judge Winter wrote the opin­ion in the case, and he circulated the opinion not only among the panel, other members of the panel, but the other four circuit judges of the fourth circuit? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The other five. Senator ERVIN. I mean the other five judges. Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir; yes, he did. Senator ERVIN. SO as a matter of fact this case was decided by the 
panel of three which included two circuit judges and one district judge in exactly the same way that the trial district judge had decided, and the other five circuit judges agreed that that decision was correct? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think that is correct. 
Senator ERVIN. In other words, the nine judges that had any con­nection with this case were all of the same opinion, that the decision which you had made on the 10th day of November was a sound and right decision in the case ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. And thereafter, an application for writ of certiorari was filed asking the Supreme Court to review the case, and the Su­preme Court declined to grant the writ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator ERVIN. Was there ever a formal petition for a rehearing filed with the circuit court ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Not as such After the time had run, there was a petition to extend the time first, and that was denied, and then there was a petition to reconsider our denial of the petition to extend the time within which to file. 
Senator ERVIN. What was the period of time in which the petition 
for rehearing was required to be filed under the rules ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Thirty days. Senator ERVIN. And was the motion for the extension of time made 
within the 30 days ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir; it was not. Senator ERVIN. In other words, under the rules it would not have 
been in order for the court to consider the petition for rehearing? Judge HAYNSWORTH. This is correct. It was not in order. Senator ERVIN. Did you ever know of a petition for rehearing ever 
being granted in any case unless one of the judges that had heard the case thought it ought to be reheard, or had some serious doubts about a question?
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. Of course, you are correct when you referred to the rather forlorn hope with which these things are filed. 
It is a very rare thing for one to be granted, and it is not granted in my court unless for some reason, in a panel like this, at least one judge has a strong conviction that a mistake has been made. 
Senator ERVIN. And there was never a petition for rehearing 
granted unless one member of the court, who participated in the deci­sion, has very serious doubts as to the validity of the decision, isn't that 
true? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, at least that much, perhaps a little more 
than that. 
Senator ERVIN. Yes, and at no time did any of the judges of the court, either the panel or any of the other judges of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, express any doubt whatever about the soundness of this decision? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. None whatever. 
Senator ERVIN. I do not ask any comment on this, but when Judge Winter testified, I gave my experience both as a lawyer and a judge on petitions for rehearing. I said if there is any time where love's labor is lost completely, it is riling for petition for rehearing when no judge dissents from the opinion of the court. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I agree. 
Senator HRUSKA. Will the Senator yield? 
Senator ERVIN. Yes. 
Senator HRUSKA. DO you know of any instance, Judge Haynsworth, where the 30 days for filing a petition for rehearing had expired, and then a motion was made to extend the time, and the filing of a motion for rehearing was out of time? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Where it has been granted, you mean? 
Senator HRUSKA. Yes, where it has been granted. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, I do not know, but Senator, if there were some good reason advanced for not having filed it earlier, and if some member of the court really thought a mistake had been made, I do not think we would refuse to do so on the ground it was not in time. But as Senator Ervin suggests, petitions for rehearing are very rarely granted in any event. When they are stale when they get there they have much less chance, of course, than when they are on time. 
Senator COOK. Would the Senator yield ? 
Senator HRUSKA. Surely. 
Senator COOK. On this point, judge, Judge Winter said that the mo­tion to extend the time to file a motion for a rehearing was filed with the court on March 26. Now, under the Federal rules, you have 30 days from the time the case is handed down, not counting the day that it is handed down, in which to file a motion for a rehearing. I think the question that Senator Hruska is posing is the time expired, the 30 days expired for the litigants in this case to file a motion for a new trial on the 4th day of March. They filed on the 26th day of March, 22 days later after their time had expired. They filed a motion to extend the time for the filing of a motion for a new trial. 
Now, I am sure you have had instances where litigants have filed a motion to extend within the 30-day period, which the court has read­ily granted, either because of records to get together, exhibits to get together, but I think the situation here is we have a situation where the litigants filed a motion to extend the time 22 clays after their time had actually expired ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct; yes, sir. 
Senator COOK. Thank you. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. If a motion had been made within the time to extend the time, those are routinely granted. 
Senator COOK. I have a notion that if you had granted the exten­sion of the time, 22 days after the time had actually expired for the motion to be filed for rehearing in the first place, I think if you had granted that without having a hearing, so that the plaintiff in this case had had an opportunity to protest, I think you would have quite a Donnybrook on your hands, would you not? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think we would have. 
Senator ERVIN. Judge, I am inclined to entertain the opinion that as a matter of law that the court had no power to grant a request for an extension of time to file a petition for rehearing after the time allowed by law had expired ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. YOU may be correct. I really have not gone into that, and I am not prepared to express an opinion. 
Senator ERVIN. Yes. You see I am inclined to believe that the win­ning party by that time has got what you might consider to be a vested interest in the decision that has already been made. Now, inasmuch as you did not own this stock, and did not acquire it for some weeks after you had voted on November 10,1967, the ownership of the stock could not possibly have had any influence whatever in your original decision ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir; it could not have. 
Senator ERVIN. And the decision in which you participated was rot affected in any degree by the factors in the Brunswick Corp. ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is right. Senator ERVIN. Judge, I spent a total of 15 years of my life as a 
judge, and it is perfectly understandable to me as a result of my own experience over that period of time why it never occurred to you that on the day that you decided to purchase this stock that the Brunswick Corn, had been interested in this. 
My experience has been that there are two different types of cases that come before courts for determination. One of them is the routine case, where there is no complicated question and no interesting ques­tions of fact and law is involved, and that is true of the great majority of the cases the courts hear. Judges dismiss cases of that kind from their minds. 
Now, where the case involves an unusually interesting question of fact, or a very novel or intriguing question of law, I could remember the question of law that was involved in the case, but I never could remember the names of the parties who are litigants. I would hate to say at this moment how many cases I participated in deciding in 15 years I served on the bench. They run literally, counting the criminal cases tried, into thousands. 
Then I sat for 6 years on the Supreme Court of North Carolina and I wrote opinions, and I concurred in other opinions, several hundreds of them, and if my very life depended upon it at this moment, I seriously doubt whether I could not tell you at this moment the names of the parties in 25, out of the thousands of cases I have tried in 15 years as a judge. 
Not only is this true about judges, it is sometimes true to a lesser extent about lawyers, because 1 remember reading a story about Lord Russell, who was a great Irish advocate, and his clerk told him that he had a certain case coming up to be tried in a certain court on a certain day, and Lord Russell said, "Why, I never heard of that case." 
The clerk said: Well, that is rather strange, because that case was tried by you before, taken up on appeal, there was a reversal and a new trial was ordered. Lord Russell said: If I carried the names of all the parties of all the cases that I have been interested in in my head I would have to have a very peculiar head. In my mind this is perfectly understandable to me. Now after you realize that the case i Judge HAYNSWORTH. I might just inject here this occurs all the time. When I mention to a judge of my court, ask him if he recalled the case of Smith v. Jones we heard last month, the answer almost always is, "No. What was it about ?" When you tell him what it was about then it brings it back and you can talk about it. This is quite frequent. Senator ERVIN. Right at this point I could only recall three or four cases with the titles and names of the parties to it. Now understanding this as I do, after this opinion came through, you would have had to have the whole trail set aside and had another panel try on a case that nobody thought had any merit in it ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I would have done that if there was any doubt at that time about it, but without it I did not think I was required to. Senator ERVIN. I frankly regret that this event happened, but I do not think it reflects that you, like other men who are judges, like everybody, perhaps do not always remember everything that hap­pened in the past, especially names of litigants. I think it would be one of the greatest tragedies that the American people would suffer, if a man of your legal learning and legal experience and intellectual integrity and personal integrity should be denied a seat on the Sup­reme Court, and that the American people be denied the benefit of 3*our services on anything like the Brim* >r irk case. I cannot help but remember that there was another man from the fourth circuit at one time who was appointed to the Supreme Court, and his nomination was fought by the identical forces that are fighting your nomination, and this nomination was rejected by a margin of 2 votes. I refer to John J. Parker. He stayed on the circuit court, and Avas denied an opportunity to serve on the Supreme Court. That was a great tragedy to the American people because he was one of the great jurists this country has ever known. I will not ask for any comment on this, but I have examined the de­cisions that Mr. Harris urged as showing union bias on your part, antiunion bias on your part. There are really only six of them that readied the Supreme Court outside of the Darlington cases. Cases arising out of the Darlington litigation reached your court three times. On two of the occasions you have participated in the deci­sion in favor of the union, so they cannot show you are biased against the union. 
In the other case you joined the court in holding that the case was 
not right for enforcing the decision of the National Labor Relations 
Board. That case went to the Supreme Court of the United States and 
the Supreme Court held the same thing as far as the result is con­cerned, and sent it back for determination of other crucial issues. When 
those issues were determined adverse to the Darlington interests you 
joined in the decision upholding the Board. 
Now, in these other seven cases, four of them were involved with 
just one question of law, and that is the circumstances under which 
cards can be used in lieu of a secret election to establish that a union 
represents the majority of the employees in a bargaining unit. 
One of your decisions was the Logan case, in which your court re­
versed the National Labor Relations Board decision in accordance 
with very familiar law in existence at that time. 
Evidently the parties to that case must have thought that decision 
was valid, because they did not appeal from it. 
The other three cases were cases that went up in the Gissel case, they were combined with a case from another circuit and the Supreme Court did send them back, but they sent them back to the National Labor Relations Board and while there is a lot of dicta in the opinion, the truth in that case was that the case was tried before the National Labor Relations Board, and in the court of the fourth circuit, upon the law as it existed at the time the Board and the circuit court held the cases. When it was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States, the General Counsel filed a brief, as Chief Justice Warren says, in harmony with the law as it had been in existence at the time the Labor Board and the circuit court decided the cases. 
But Judge Warren held, and this is all he held, as far as the decision of the Court is concerned, that since the National Labor Relations Board had changed is rules on the oral argument of its counsel, and the new rules seemed to be satisfactory to the Supreme Court, that they would have to remand the cases to the National Labor Relations Board because it had made findings of fact in respect to the old law, and had made no findings of fact in respect to this new rule. Now maybe your court should have had prophetic power to deter­mine what the Supreme Court was going to decide, but I do not think judges are required to be prophets. They are required to have some­thing to do with the law, but nothing with prophesies. 
Another one of those cases was one where your court was reversed on a decision made by the Supreme Court 6 days before the case was heard in the Supreme Court on a point of law that had never been passed on before, so there is another place where you need prophesies to determine what the Congress is going to do and what the Supreme Court is going to do. 
Another one of the cases, NLRB v. Washington Aluminum Co., involved seven men, the head notes in the opinion says they were nonunion men, that were assigned to work in a room they considered to be too cold. Notwithstanding the fact they had a rule in the plant that the men could not leave their work without communicating with the foreman, these men left, and they were discharged for violating the rule. 
The Supreme Court held that, contrary to the circuit court that they were entitled to leave together. They were acting in concert to 
protect mutual interests under the act, and I can see where, the de­cision of your court Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did not write it. 
Senator ERVIN. Was perfectly valid. Now, to my mind the reasons advanced by the AFL-CIO to show union bias on your part are about the shabbiest arguments I have ever heard advanced, and I have been hearing arguments for 50-odd years now. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I would add to that only that I think if anyone is to appraise my work in this field they should read all the opinions I wrote and not just a selected few. If they read all I wrote they would find many that are widely regarded as being prolabor. 
Senator ERVIN. I can understand why the litigants would use that kind of an appraisal if they are under the conviction that all things should be decided in their favor regardless of what the facts and the law might be. 
Thank you. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Senator Hart? 
Senator HART. Mr. Chairman. Judge, I certainly do not want to debate Senator Ervin on those cases through you, but I listened to that testimony and it did not seem so outrageous or whatever the words were. 
Senator ERVIN. I did not, either, until I read the cases. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do not think there is any doubt in my at­tempting to debate the merits or the demerits of particular cases. I only surest that a fair appraisal I do think should take into account all opinions I have written in this field, and then one can draw his own conclusion. I will not quarrel with him whatever it is. 
Senator HART. I perhaps have been at fault in the past in not spend­ing quite as much time about the appearance of things as others have, and I am not even indicating now that merely the appearance of a violation of a code of ethics is something that should cause us to get into a great flap, unless you are that kind of person. But let me put it this way. See if this is not a fair statement, although it may be a very narrow aspect of the matter before us. 
There has been a discussion here involving your responses and others' reactions that say in effect well, in November of 1967, when this Brunswick case came up, you did not even own any stock. That routinely, in December, you took your broker's advice and bought some. Some investments are good, some are bad. And in November the court unanimously was of the opinion that the Brunswick case was a simple one anyway. 
Then when that motion to extend the time for leave to apply for a new trial came up, you did own stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator HART. In Brunswick? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator HART. The litigant. But there was not any real question as to what the right reaction was to the motion. Everybody agreed it should be denied. So you continued to hold the stock. I take it you do to this day? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do. Senator HART. Anyone who has demonstrated sensitivity about re­specting the canons of judicial ethics then has to figure out how canon 
26 has been, what shall we say, ignored, dismissed, that really it is not important? Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO ; I think it is important, sir, but I do not think it was violated at all, its letter or its spirit. 
Senator HART. Well, what is its sprit ? It says that if you are on the court, you should not invest in anything apt to be involved in litiga­tion. That is exactly what it says. And if you go on the court and find that you have already had something that is apt to be involved in litigation, you should get rid of it. 
Now, how do we describe Brunswick, something that is apt to be involved in litigation ? No; it is something that has been involved. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator HART. And you still hold the stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir; but if you are suggesting that a judge may not own a stock in any concern which has ever been in his court, then this is the first time I have every heard such a suggestion. 
Senator HART. What does canon 26 contemplate ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Canon 26, I think you have got to put it in perspective, sir. Senator HART. In the perspective of this Brunswick case ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I am suggesting you have to put it in the per­spective of the problem that it is designed to meet, sir, and the per­spective is if you have a small court, dependent upon the functioning of a single judge, let us take as an example. I do not mean this does not apply to judges on the courts of appeal, it does, but in the per­spective of a single judge in a trial court that has jurisdiction in one county, and a bus company in that county is in his court every term of court he has, and he owns stock in that bus line, so that he cannot sit, and the court breaks down because he cannot function as a judge, of course he should dispose of his stock. He should not retain it. This is an extreme example but this is what canon—this is the problem the canon is concerned with. 
Judges cannot be selected and paid to judge if they do not judge and cannot judge ethically. But that does not mean at all that that same trial judge owning some stock in A.T. & T. must sell his A.T. & T. stock because one time A.T. & T. gets haled into his court as a de­fendant. He steps aside, and lets some other judge hear the case, but the canon does not mean that he then must sell the AT. & T. stock because one time it came into his court. That is not its purpose. It is not its intent. 
As I say, I have never heard it suggested before that it should be construed as you suggest that it be, It is perfectly consistent with the statute that a judge should sit when he is required to sit, if he has a financial interest or stock holding in a case, so that he may not sit he gets out, but that does not mean that he thereupon must immedi­ately sell that stock, not unless he is in a situation in which, because of his stock holding, he must really default in the discharge of his duty of judging.
Senator HART. I think it could have been more aptly worded if that were really what the intent was, but I am almost embarrassed to pursue this line of questioning because I am not one who has ever demonstrated any great sensitivity about the appearance of things. I think one could say that there is an appearance here of a tendency to accept as sanctioned by canon 26 a situation that on the reading of it would suggest that it had not been intended by the section, but believe me, judge, this does not send me into any great concern. I am impressed by the fact that sometimes it appears canons are of ex­traordinarily great significance, and most rigid adherence shall be paid them, and other times we cannot figure out why it was, de­pending on the objectives 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The canons are written in broad language. Of course, they are subject to very broad construction, and yet most judges have a feel for what they think is the purpose and the intent of canons and they attempt to comply with them. But I do not think that there is anything in this canon which requires the construction you suggest. Indeed as I indicated, I never heard any judge or any lawyer, before you did, suggest that construction. 
Senator HART. Thank you. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Senator Bayh? 
Senator BAYH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
Judge, I appreciate your patience. I would like to state again at the risk of being repetitious, I think we have raised some points here today that clearly have much to do with the concern that I have been trying to express, whether or not the investment was profitable, whether you were involved in some sinister effort at profit, whether you were in collusion with anyone. 
I have never intimated that and I do not intend to. Despite the fact that it may or may not have been a unanimous decision, and the soundness of your judgment on labor cases, I personally do not think we want a labor judge. I think we want a judge who looks at labor and management decisions that come up with as objective an opinion as he can. 
But I am concerned, deeply concerned, that when this decision has been made, up or down, that it be based on the highest standards we can find for someone who sets a standard for himself as well as for others that come before him. That is why I think that this may be disconcerting. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It is not so to me, sir. 
Senator BAYH. Well, you are a very patient man if it is not. It would be to me. This business we were talking about a while ago—-I just want to throw a couple of these things out and be done with them. The question as I see it, I do not ask you whether you agree with your colleague this morning, the question we have before us is not whether the 30-day period for rehearing, asking for the extension of that time, had passed, which dragged on to August 26, which looks rather embarrassing, but whether as of 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Rather what, sir ? 
Senator BAYH. Pardon me ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Rather what, sir? You said it looks rather— what? 
Senator BAYH. It looks, you know, you can make a substantive case or try to make one out of the fact that you are not talking about February 2. You are talking about August 6. I do not think you are. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Embarrassing? I just wondered what you were referring to. 
34-561—69 Senator BAYH. That you had an overly long time to control this 
case and consider it. I think the key question 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. There is nothing embarrassing to me, sir. 
Senator BAYH. Strike the word embarrassing, peculiar, of interest 
to some other people. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do not think it is peculiar even. I will be 
glad to discuss what happened with you. 
Senator BAYH. I think it has been adequately^ discussed, unless you think someone put a wrong interpretation on it. I was trying to be on your side on this point, judge. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. All right. I did not get that notion, but if you are I will be delighted. 
Senator BAYH. Perhaps it seems unique to you if that were the case. It seems to me the key question we have to face here is whether from the period of November 10 through February 2 there was not time for rehearing, but whether you and your fellow judges could have repossessed that case without a rehearing and changed your mind on the subject. 
Now, is there any question in your mind that there have been cases that have come before your court or other courts of appeal when be­tween the time the case was argued and the case was finally written that judges or the court itself has changed its mind ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Of course we do sometimes; yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. I concur in the judgment of every one here, includ­ing yourself, that the likelihood of that happening was probably very remote in this case. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator BAYH. This was brought back to your attention. I share Senator Ervin's concern about this business of memory. It is very difficult, not having been in judicial robes, to see the time period from November 10 to December 20 as being long enough to do that. I can see that in some cases it would. But it was brought back to your at­tention then on the 27th when the opinion was circulated, is that correct ? You mentioned that this did come to your attention. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. A day or so after that. 
Senator BAYH. The 26th I think the stock was actually purchased. It was ordered the 26th, it was purchased the 27th, Judge Winter's opinion was circulated then. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It was mailed on that day and I would have received it a day or so after that. 
Senator BAYH. In other words, it was brought to your attention then. I think 1 or 2 days do not make any difference as far as I am concerned. Did you consider, I am just trying to think of what alter­native could be followed, did you consider at all at that time disclosing this or asking the advice of your fellow judges ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I considered what I should do and I made up my own mind. I had no doubt in the world what they would have told me if I had asked them, but I waited for Judge Jones who sent in his concurrence promptly. There was no doubt in the world about it. If at that time Judge Winter had expressed any doubt, Judge Jones had expressed any doubt, I would have scheduled the case to be re­heard then. I would have ordered then that this case be reheard before 
three different judges. If I was not rightly in the case, then I had 
wrongly consulted with them, they knew what I thought. My views 
may have influenced their, and I would have felt I should take them 
out, too. 
Senator BATH. I think you are being unduly harsh on yourself if 
I might say so. The fact that this case was argued in November and 
you did not have any notice at all of this until after 1 day—your 
memory was not refreshed until 1 day after this—I think to consider 
yourself disqualified from the original case would have been going a 
bit far. I was just suggesting you say perhaps, "All right, gentlemen, 
here is what I find. If you want to rehear this, why, fine. 
I think they would have said, "Why, heavens no." 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. They would have advised me to do exactly 
what I did do. I knew that. I did not consult them at the time. I knew 
what would be said. Judge Winter, of course said so today. I did not 
have his advice at the time because I did not ask for it, but he said today 
what he thought. 
Senator BATH. I think you are probably right, that he would have. Let me ask you a hypothetical question. If this is an unfair hypothet­ical, here again I am trying to look on into the future, in your tre­mendously significant post, and try to get some of these things cleared away in the past as quickly as we can. Let us take a hypothetical ques­tion, in which a case comes down on November 10, 1969. On December 20, your stockbroker orders 1.000 shares of XYZ Corp. On December 26 the stock is executed. On December 27, there is that same opinion that is circulated again. What would you do under the present cir­cumstances of the hypothetical question today ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Of course, I do not intend to get involved in this, because any stock I would buy now would be completely checked against undecided cases, so I have got a protection on it. I am not going to get in this predicament again. 
Senator BATH. NOW, yet me ask you a question. First of all, I in­tended to start out at the beginning by apologizing for bringing up this Brunswick case in the heat of the discussion with Professor Frank 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. YOU need not do so. 
Senator BAYH. I think if I had had the opportunity to dis­cuss it frankly right then, although since there had been such a period of time elapsed, perhaps your memory and mine would need to be refreshed on the facts of the case, but I apologize for any embarrass­ment that that may have caused you. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It has not, sir. Senator BAYH. YOU are not an easily embarrassed man, I can see that. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, but when I have got nothing to hide, I am not embarrassed about its being brought out. Of course, I am con­cerned when it appears in the press with intonations that I do not like. 
Senator BAYH. Yes. Judge HAYNSWORTH. And that are not true, but as long as they are open and frank, and frankly appraised they do not embarrass me, sir. Senator BAYH. The inferences are what would concern me, not necessarily the facts. Now let me just ask you 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It depends on what the inferences are. Infer­ences are not, well 
Senator BAYH. I asked your stockbroker, Mr. McCall, about the ownership in certain cases. We had these G. o5 O. cases. Let me ask two or three questions in this general area. Have you sat on cases where you have owned a pecuniary interest ? Now, the Brunswick thing, let us lay that to rest. The C.<& O. case, 600 and how many dollars ? Even I would call that insignificant in the light of your holdings. If I might take the liberty to verify that, I do not want to do so without getting your permission, but I would like if you have no objection to disclose the amount of interest that you received in 1968 from that. I am look­ing at your tax return. It is private and confidential. 
Senator ERVIN. That is his wife's stock. 
Senator BAYH. His wife's stock. 
Senator ERVIN. I could tell you how much they got. They got $a share because I inherited five shares of that stock myself and I still have it. 
Senator BAYH. HOW many shares do you have, 10 ? 
Senator ERVIN. $4 a share, $1 each quarter. 
Senator BAYH. I want to say that the Senator from North Carolina is accurate. He remembers the stock dividends better than he does past cases apparently. Senator ERVIN. I do because that represents one of my largest holdings. 
[Laughter.] 
Senator BAYH. I should have known better than to get involved in that colloquy. [Laughter.] Have you sat on other cases, judge, where you had a pecuniary interest in the stock ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, 
Senator BAYH. Before you answer this, let me suggest that a mo­ment ago I did ask Mr. MoCall about your ownership as listed in your stock portfolio, I want to disclose everything here, of Nationwide Corporation 500 shares which is listed in your information as $5,112, Nationwide Life 20 shares, $340, and I see from some information that has been given me that they have a number of subsidiaries, West Coast Life, Nationwide Life, National Casualty, Michigan Life, Northern Life, National Services, Inc. Is there any relationship to this stockholding with the cases that are listed, one of which was—first of all Mr. McCall said he bought that stock on July 8, 1964—this Wild v. Nationwide Life Insurance Co. was decided on the 23d of June 1964. I suppose theoretically when we talk about that rehearing business, I am not inclined to do that. 
There was another case that was argued on September 30, 1964, decided on January 4, 1965, entitled Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company v. Akers, 340 Federal Second 150. Is there any relationship between that latter case which was argued on September 30 and de­cided on January 4,1965, after the purchase of that Nationwide Cor­poration stock on July 8,1964 ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. "What is this case, sir? Senator BAYH. Nationwide Mutual Insurance v. Akers. Is there any relationship between that corporation and the Nationwide? 
Senator COOK. What is the citation ? 
Senator BATH. 340 Fed. Sec. 150. It has come to my attention and 
I would like to clear it up once and for all. If Mr. McCall can be help­
ful to us, there are so many different names and I do not want to in­
sinuate or infer. It could well have been another one totally unrelated. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do not know whether this was the case that 
provoked it, but I made an inquiry at one time after I became a stock­
holder in Nationwide about Nationwide Mutual. My information is 
it is a mutual. There are no stockholders in it. There may be some 
connection which I cannot think of with Nationwide itself, but I un­derstand that Nationwide Mutual has no stockholders, and I am not 
one and Nationwide itself is not. 
Senator BATH. If it is a subsidiary of Nationwide Corp., of which 
you are a 500 share stockholder, then we have another problem. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It would not be a sub if it is a mutual, sir. Mutuals have no stockholders. This is my information. Senator BATH. Did you say inclination or information ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. My information is that Nationwide Mutual has 
no stockholders. 
Senator BATH. Nationwide Mutual has no stockholders, then it is no 
subsidiary of Nationwide Corp., so we are talking about apples and 
oranges, two different cases, unrelated. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do not understand you. If it was a sub of Nationwide itself, it would have stock which would be owned by Na­tionwide, but my information is that Nationwide Mutual is a mutual concern with no stock outstanding anywhere. No one owns any stock in it, so I was informed and as I believe. I have seen no reference to it m anything that I recall seeing that I got from Nationwide. 
Senator BATH. I accept that. I appreciate your clearing that up. May I ask you to share some further thoughts about Carolina Vend-A-Matic. We got interrupted on that the other day and I hate to harken back to that business, but I must say very frankly that I am more con­cerned about the possible appearances that this particular situation may have than I am on the other ones that we have been discussing. 
Now, as I recall when we were discussing Carolina Vend-A-Matic before, I asked you if Mr. Denis had been specifically instructed not to specify your relationship with the corporation, and I think you said yes he had. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, he had. 
Senator BATH. The thing that concerns me with this type of rela­tionship is that someone might be instructed to do something and then take advantage of someone who is in a position of high trust without him even being any part of the action or having any idea what ie go­ing on. I think perhaps that may have indeed been the case. I notice in Dun & Bradstreet it was listed on October 18, 196.3, about Caro­lina Vendomatic, it lists you, sir, as the first vice president. I do not know whether Mr. Denis brought that to your attention or whether he has done that customarily with the various customers of Carolina Vendomatic. This concerns me, coming from the textile industry as Mr. Denis did, and doing such a significant amount of business with the firms in the textile business, that he might use your influence with­out your knowing it, to further enhance the business of the corpora­tion. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, in the first place, Denis is himself a very 
responsible upstanding man. He is not a man of dishonor. He is not 
a little man. I am sure he would not do such a thing. I am sure he did 
not. He is not the kind of man that would. 
Of course, when this question first came up, sir; it did then appear 
that there had been a report done in Dun & Bradstreet. This was the 
first time I knew anything about the fact that there had been a Dun 
& Bradstreet report. I was wholly unaware of it. After the investi­gation came up it was mentioned by Miss Eames in the letter she 
wrote, but this was the first information I had about it. I may say that 
the information it contains is inaccurate in many, many respects. 
Senator BATH. Unfortunately it is inaccurate by mentioning you as 
vice president, if indeed the first vice president is not accurate. I sug­gest that at least Dun & Bradstreet lists as the source of this Wade 
Denis. I am not suggesting you were the one who got Mr. Denis to do 
this. I am suggesting that your interest with the corporation permitted 
him to do it without your having any idea. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, I am sure that he did not use my name 
in connection with any attempts to secure locations for the machines. 
Of course, I speak out of trust in him. I was not there with, him, so 
that all I can say is that I believe him. I think he is worthy of belief. 
Senator BAYII. I mentioned to you earlier, you were talking about this trustee relationship that you had with the pension and profit sharing. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. 
Senator BAYH. And you said as I recall this was not one that was set up specifically or primarily for officers, that it was designed to benefit a broad number of the 140 employees. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Certainly key employees among the 
Senator BAYH. Pardon me? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Certainly the key employees among the 140. None of the directors themselves were in it. 
Judge BAYH. Have you had a chance to determine the answer to a question that I raised earlier about the number of people who were covered by this trust ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. No, sir. If I was requested to look and see, I didn't make a note of it. I did not understand that I was and I have not looked into it. 
Senator BAYH. I don't recall asking you to find the number. In all fairness, if I did ask I don't remember, frankly. I am concerned again about that relationship with that Vend-A-Matic Corp. That just sticks in my craw for some reason or other. Here I would imagine that the relationship with that pension fund was rather a remote one. There were what, two or three trustees involved ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I believe there were three trustees, with very little money in it. As I reported last time my connection with that ended when stock was exchanged for ARA stock. 
Senator BAYH. Are you aware whether at any time you or any of the other trustees that were handling that gave any thought to the Welfare and Pension Plan Disclosure Act, which requires that the administrator of a profit-sharing or pension plan must file a descrip­tion of that plan in an annual report thereon to the Secretary of Labor? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, the-
Senator BAYH. Was it too inconsequential to come under that act ? We were informed by the Department of Labor that there was no filing of it, in a letter as of September 13. Now, is there some reason why that particular retirement plan does not qualify? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. 1 simply do not know, sir. Those things—I means what legal advice this concern got from my former law firm and not from me. I wasn't consulted about it and I didn't know. This is the kind of thing a judge doesn't keep up with. 
Senator BAYH. I understand that, Judge. I understand that, I do, but I am suggesting to you that indeed you are in a very tenuous posi­tion as trustee of that trust, if it did not file a plan. It is in violation of law and you could have found yourself a litigant in your own court. Now, that may be ridiculous and I don't think it would ever happen, because there probably weren't enough employees and enough funds but it is this type of thing wherein I think you would have to go to the nth. degree to be careful. 
Senator ERVIN. This 
Senator BAYH. Just a moment. I know here again you didn't have an idea about this thing, but also it has come to our attention that prior to the time of the merger of Carolina Vend-A-Matic with ARA, in fact I would be glad to ask the chairman if I could put in the record the entire letter that we received 
Senator ERVIN. I think you will find if you read the Disclosure Act, it applies only to management and labor unions which are engaged in interstate commerce. 
Senator BAYH. Senator, they have a subsidiary in your State, the parent corporation is in South Carolina. I would suggest that that is probably interstate commerce. They operate in Georgia. Again we are nitpicking, I suppose, but it is this appearance, this appearance, the fact that the ARA Corp. before this merger had sent notice to ARA that they were investigating certain of their acquisitions. That was on February 2,1962, and on February 5,1962 the directive was broadened to include all of ARA's acquisitions, and then on October 22 of 1963, the bureau of restraint of trade recommended that a complaint be filed against ARA. 
Now, in all honesty this complaint, the recommendation of the bu­reau of restraint of trade, was not the Georgia-South Carolina mar­keting area. 
Senator ERVIN. Pardon me. The evidence is that when he took the stock in ARA it took over the pension fund, and he was not an officer of this ARA. 
Senator BAYH. Senator, I am not suggesting that the judge was. I am suggesting that at the time of the merger there was a very serious matter pending before the Federal Trade Commission involving the parent company which was about to assume the stock in Carolina Vend-A-Matic. 
Senator ERVIN. What has that got to do with this ? This reminds me of Longfellow's lines which said: Time is fleeting, and our hearts, though stout and brave, still, like muffled 
drums, are beating funeral marches to the grave. 
Senator BAYH. What is that supposed to mean ? 
Senator ERVIN. It means that apparently we are going to be in the funeral march to the grave before we get through this proceeding. Senator BAYH. I hope not. I am concerned and I suppose I should ask the question if you had 
to do it over again whether you would still maintain that kind of re­lationship with Carolina Vend-A-Matic. You feel that there is abso­lutely nothing that was improprietous here ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know what you mean by that kind of relationship. I was a stockholder as I have said. 
Senator BAYH. Stockholder, vice president, and your wife is secre­tary and you were on the board of directors and you own $450,000 worth of stock. You are doing business with one of the litigants. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, now, Senator 
Senator BAYH. A significant amount of business of the corporation was done with textile companies, and the case involved was a textile case. This is what concerns me. It is a matter of appearance. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I was a director until 1963. I was an inactive vice president. We have been into all of this. Your refer­ence to textiles, though, I have not got your point yet, and I would like to talk about it a bit. I would like to correct the record. You said that all but about 12 of the 46 concerns with which Vend-A-Matic did business were in textiles. I know it was inadvertent. You don't mean to misconstrue the record. But we went through it. We counted 14 that were not textiles. We counted eight 
Senator BAYH. Excuse me. We removed two from the list. That made all but 14 of how many were the total ? 
Senator COOK. Let him finish his answer. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Wait a minute. Eight we didn't know. Twenty-four you and I think are textiles, 24, but not all but 12. This would be 34 rather than 24. But I just suggest this not for the purpose of suggest­ing that a majority of these are not textile concerns. I do suggest, as I said last time, that I think it is probably a fair mix of the kind of industry you find in that place, and this leads me into something which I would like to say, because the suggestion has come that because Vend-A-Matic did business in textile plants as well as other kinds of plants, and because as a lawyer I had textile clients as well as other kinds of clients, that there is something wrong with my being con­sidered for high judicial office, and I want to suggest to you that if a lawyer lives in a rural section of farm folk, if he does anything at all he is going to do business with farm people, with the doctors who take care of the sick farm people when they are sick, teachers who teach their youngsters, people who sell seed and fertilizer, with folk who service their TV sets. 
Now, I don't understand that there is any reason in the world to suppose that a lawyer with that kind of connection elected to the bench should be said to be, that there should be any lifting of an eye­brow in the slightest in the fact that he sits on a case involving farmers and people that sell the farmer goods, the grocer who sells him sugar. I have never—indeed our whole system has grown up in the fact that in a community like that, local lawyers ascend the trial bench and they do try those very cases. 
Now, if it is suggested because I have represented textile people among other clients that I can't sit on a textile case, then a judge in a rural section of that sort cannot sit on a case involving a farmer, and this is a new idea to me, and I suggest this as an example of the problem I am having about what you say concerns you in your own mind because I can't understand what it is that does concern you. 
But the fact is that in the whole history of our courts and our tradi­tion is that judges are drawn from active practice, and every one of them has worked with the kind of people in the community in which he lives. Now, practices can vary, of course. Now, mine, you may say, I was to some extent connected with the textile industry, and one thing you asked for was a list of the textile clients I had at the time and the proportion of the fees out of the total fees in 1957. I have that list for my old law firm. I may say what the proportion of the fees was. Twenty-eight percent of the gross fees came from textile clients in 1957. 
Of course that connection was much less close, for instance, than Mr. Justice Goldberg's connection with labor, and there has been an implication here, because he did not sit on the Darlington Mills, case, that he took himself out of that case because of his connection and concern with labor relations, and that he just shouldn't have anything to do with such things. 
Of course, this is quite untrue. He sat on some 29, I believe it was, cases involving labor relations, and some of which the AFL-CIO was a party, and others of which had filed briefs amicus curiae. And Mr. Justice Goldberg wrote opinions in some of those cases. I am not saying this to suggest that I found any basis to criticize him at all. I would find fault with him if he had not sat on such cases. I think this is the duty of a judge. But I simply mention that there has been an implication because he did not sit on one case, and I am sure he had very good reason for not sitting on that one, does not take him out of this field, and the suggestion that I think is in the back of your mind that I am still struggling to find out what it is that is concern­ing you in the back of your mind, in the light of the fact that Mr. Justice Goldberg, who has been mentioned as a splendid example, and I agree with it, I think he is, sits on cases which came right out of the immediate background that he had, too, and he had been much closer, of course, to this particular thing than I am. 
Senator ERVIN. And it probably made him a better lawyer in that field. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I have nothing but praise for Mr. Justice Goldberg. It has simply been mentioned here that he did one thing and suggested that I did something else and I simply suggest that that just isn't true. 
Senator BAYH. I think that there must be a communication gap, be­cause I can't get through what is worrying me, and I am concerned because what is worrying me apparently isn't worrying you, and I don't know where we go except just to change the thrust of the thing. If I misquoted the number of firms there, I though I did it in going down the list in which I asked you one at a time. Let the record stand as you amended it. We can find out what the firms were. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This is but a slight thing. 
Senator BAYH. I am not trying to be at all disputative toward the textile industry. I just cannot help but feel that—well, there is no need for opening that again. 
I want to ask you one other thrust of questions here. We have had a lot of discussion back and forth about what are ethical standards for a judge.
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes. 
Senator BAYH. I want to take you out of the picture if I could, and ask you to think about cases that will come before you on the Su­preme Court, and I realize you can't be overly specific, but what do you foresee as far as those judges that are brought into question on having a conflict of interest at a lower level? How do you define ethical standards for such a judge? What criterion makes him able to make a nonbiased, an unbiased decision ? How do you define a sub­stantial interest ? This is one idea that has been knocked around. The Rehnquist treatise, did you read Assistant Attorney General Rehn­quist's treatise on the duty to sit and the duty not to sit? Do you concur in that ? I won't ask a whole series of questions, but I would just like to have your thoughts on this area if you please. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. This, of course, is undefined under the statute. It is there, and each judge I think has to make up his mind for him­self what is substantial and what is not. Senator, there is nothing to which I can turn where this has been discussed at large which would give great guide to a judge anywhere. It might be helpful if someone would undertake a discussion at large of this, but I know of nowhere that I could put my hands on it. I don't know where I could enlighten you. 
The only thing that I know
Senator BAYH. I don't want any discussion. I would like to have your thoughts on it. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The only thing that I know that sometimes I feel quite strongly that if it is substantial or if it is not, if there were doubt about it, judges should talk about such things. 
Senator BAYH. YOU feel we have some difference of opinion as to what the positions of canons of ethics, the legal canons of ethics and the ABA interpretation, the opinions thereof—would you care to give us your opinion as to whether you think the canons of ethics should be taken into consideration in judging this standard? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, of course I do. 
Senator BAYH. Are you familiar with the Commonwealth Coating case, the 1968 case which we discussed back and forth with Professor Frank here? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. In general. I wasn't here but in general know about that case. 
Senator BAYH. Are you in a position to suggest whether you think this was the right standard that the court set ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, in the context of that case, yes, I think so. 
Senator BAYH. I will just quote from one part because we have some dispute about whether the canons of ethics are in there. It seems to me we have statutes that must be considered in determining what ethical standards should be reached, but in the final analysis of the canons of ethics it is the way the court interprets these. The Court 
says in the last paragraph or two of the case, it quotes from, I think, 33, social relations, in which it says: A judge should, however, in pending or prospective litigation before him be particularly careful to avoid such action as may reasonably tend to awaken the suspicion that his social or business relations or friendships constitute an element in influencing his judicial conducts. 
And then it goes on and in its next to the last sentence says: This rule of arbitration and this canon of judicial ethics rests on the premise that any tribunal permitted by law to try cases and controversies must not only be unbiased but must avoid even the appearance of bias. 
Now, do you concur that that is a pretty good standard to set? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do. Senator BAYH. Well, you have been very kind. My concern, as I 
think I have intimated before, goes beyond you personally or the Fourth Circuit. My concern goes to the fact that if you are con­firmed it will give you the opportunity to set national policies in this area. I know you cannot decide or suggest or make opinions on pend­ing cases. I think it is rather ironic that just last week there was a case that was submitted to the Supreme Court seeking certiorari entitled Brown versus Commercial Bank of Peoria. It involved a case in Illinois in which three judges were stockholders in banks and direc­tors of banks, not the bank in the case but on banks in general, and the question involves whether or not a bank indeed has a fiduciary relationship when dealing with an old senile lady in drafting her will, and the lower court said there was no such fiduciary relationship, and you, sir, are going to have the opportunity, if you are confirmed— and I suggest you probably will be—if you are confirmed you are going to have to vote as to whether certiorari is denied or whether it is granted. In this effort people of this country are looking to you, looking to me, they are looking to all of us, to seek a standard of ethics that is perhaps higher than is humanly possible, but I think we need to do our very best. I appreciate the fact that you would agree with that final or next to the last sentence, because it seems to me we are talking about appearance of bias, appearance that you and indeed those who come before committees of Congress will receive justice and fair treatment. Not just that you will receive justice but it is the ap­pearance of justice. I appreciate your answering the questions. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Thank you, sir. 
Senator TYDINGS. When Judge Winter circulated the Brunswick opinion in the latter part of December, that was the first time you realized that you had a stock ownership in the company, did you consider discussing your ownership of the Brunswick stock with Judge Winter or the other judge on the panel ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did not, as I informed Senator Bayh. I took it upon myself, but I have no doubt what answer I would have gotten if I had. It is the same as he stated today, so that sometimes we dis­cuss such things among ourselves, sir, and other times that we don't. I had no doubt in the world but what Judge Winter's response would have been when it came up, it was his immediate response today, but I did not consult him then. 
Senator TYDINGS. Another question. ABA in opinion No. 170, which was discussed here once or twice before earlier today, reads that a judge who is a stockholder in a corporation which is a party to litiga­tion pending in his court may not with propriety "perform any act in relation to such litigation involving the exercise of judicial discretion." 
Now, would you give us your views on the ABA opinion 170, and would you discuss its application with respect to the Brunswick case and the C and O matter? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I endorse what Judge Winter said when he appeared earlier today. Essentially I think we are controlled by the statute, which says in effect as I read the statute that we must, that a judge must not sit if he has a substantial interest in the case, and with the strong implication, and it has been construed that way, that he must sit if he does not. 
In connection with stockholdings, my own idea is that for the sake of appearances, as Senator Bayh would say, to avoid that, if there is any stockholding, a judge if he can should take himself out. But that doesn't mean that in a very slight case with a very slight stockholding, a judge to my mind commits an impropriety if he goes on and acts. I talk here in terms of a judge who has a stock interest in connection with a case where the result would mean that the worth of his stock potentially may have an effect that could be measured in mills. 
There is no doubt in my mind and I am sure there is no doubt in yours that the judges we have are simply not affected by such things. This we know. And as long as it is known and accepted on that basis, 1 can't get very exercised about the fact that a judge might sit in a case where his interests are that insubstantial under the statute. 
At the same time I think the canon under this view as it is drawn if it is too restrictive should be in the forefront of the mind of a judge when he decides whether or not to sit. I do think he should take it into account. 
Senator TYDINGS. I have no further questions. 
Senator ERVIN. I understand you were asking about the ABA. 
Senator TYDINGS. I asked about an ABA opinion. 
Senator ERVIN. Involving discretion? 
Senator TYDINGS. ABA Opinion 170. 
Senator ERVIN". Involving matters of discretion, isn't it? 
Senator TYDINGS. NO, it just states as I read it, that a judge who is a stockholder in a corporation when it is a party to litigation pending in a court "may not with propriety perform any act in relation to such litigation involving the exercise of judicial discretion." That is just an American Bar Association official opinion. 
Senator ERVUNT. Yes. I don't believe that is quite germane, because these cases were not a matter of discretion. The Brunswick case was a matter of what the law and the facts showed. 
Senator TYDINGS. I wasn't trying to say they were or weren't. I asked the judge to discuss the official opinion with respect to his role in the Brunswick case, and the G and O case. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, with respect to my role in the Brunswick case, there can be no doubt in my mind that the case did not involve much. My stock interest and what was involved, in the case should have taken me out of the case, if you are asking me in those terms, yes, I would not have sat in it if I had owned the stock before the ease was heard. I would have removed myself later, if there had been any controversy about it at all, applying this 190 whatever it is. 
While you can say that you have discretion to withhold your name from what was done, pursuant to the agreement or not, it is not really a judicial act, when all you are saying is this is the proper execution by Judge Winter of what we agreed upon in November. This is the way I look upon it. 
Senator BAYH. Will the Senator yield just a moment ? 
Senator TYDINGS. Yes. 
Senator BAYH. I want to just touch on this again. I am not going to be the devil's advocate, but in light of your concurrence in the find­ing in Commonwealth Coating, I won't cite it again, but it goes pretty far to suggest appearance is what we are after. I go back to my con­cern about its appearance and all the things that have been disclosed which are not embarrassing about Carolina Vene-A-Matic. It seems to me we have a much more—or an equally—fleeting relationship in Coating. In fact I think we have 1 percent of the business involving the person in question, whereas the Carolina interest with the Milliken firm was about 3 percent. That is what concerns me about that par­ticular thing—next to the last sentence of what the Supreme Court said. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. But in that case, I haven't read it in quite some time, and I may be off, perhaps I should read it again, but as I recall, there was a code or a convention which required a prospective arbitra­tor to disclose certain things which would be used by the parties them­selves to decide whether or not they would use them. This man did not make such disclosure. In fact, he had been serving as a consultant to one of the parties in that case, and I believe with respect to the very construction out of which this controversy arose. 
In terms of a code of disclosure to permit some people to select who he will be, if he doesn't say what it is, and the parties are deprived of the chance of knowing before they agree upon him, why, this is I believe what the case involved. 
Senator BAYH. I don't expect you to know all the cases. I have read this only a couple of times here, but Professor Frank felt similarly that the American Arbitration Association ruling 18 made the state­ment, and I pointed it out to him specifically that it said in the court, in its decision: "While not controlling this case," they considered the impact but they get right back to the canons of ethics, No. 33, and they hit very hard not only on the ruling but the canons of ethics and that the basic principle must not only be unbiased but must avoid any ap­pearance of bias. This is what concerns me. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I agree completely with your statement about the appearance of being unbiased, but I still don't know why a judge who has represented farm folks, and people who sell to farm folk, if he has got an interest in a store that sells him seed and fertilizer can­not sit on a case involving farmers. 
Senator BAYH. Judge, are you suggesting that there is a real com­parison between representing a group of farmers and having a signifi­cant proprietary interest in a company that is doing business with the litigant ? I think you are going a bit far there, aren't you, with the di­rector, the vice presidential relationship? I think you sort of tear down everything you have built up here. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Again I think I am lost in your thought. You are talking about appearances of things, and I agree with you. I am concerned about them. I still don't think that what I did violated that principle.
Senator BAYH. Thank you. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Senator Thurmond. 
Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
Mr. Chairman, the South Carolina Bar Association is thoroughly behind Judge Hayns worth and I have a resolution here that was drawn by the members of Judge Haynsworth's county bar association which paid him a sterling tribute. I ask unanimous consent that the resolution be placed in the record. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Without objection it is so ordered. 
Senator THURMOND. I also ask that there be placed in the record a resolution by the Counties Association in South Carolina which passed a resolution at its conference in Charleston on August 30,1969. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Without objection that will be placed in the record. 
 
Senator THURMOND. This resolution states in part that "his record of service as a lawyer and as a jurist has proven very clearly that he is eminently qualified for the Associate Justiceship of the Supreme Court of the United States to which he has been nominated by the President of the United States." 
Mr. Chairman, I just want to say that the people of South Carolina are solidly behind Judge Haynsworth. They know him to be a man of unquestioned character and integrity, of thorough devotion to duty, faithful to the trust that is reposed to him. 
I have no questions. 
Senator MCCLELLAN. Senator Cook. 
Senator COOK. Judge Haynsworth, you were one of the incorpora­tors of Carolina Vend-A-Matic; were you not ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, I was. Senator COOK. And as a lawyer who helped create a corporation and watched it grow, you were exceedingly proud of it; weren't you ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, I was; yes, sir. 
Senator COOK. And the fact that those people that functioned in that business and your activity in it, the fact that your investment grew was one of those things that would make any individual in this Nation proud; was it not ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I was quite proud, though I may say right here until it was sold I had no idea it was worth as much as it was. No one knew it was going to fetch the amount that it did. Indeed when I offered to sell my stock to the other stockholders, I would have ac­cepted a great deal less than I wound up receiving, but it had grown greatly. I knew it, and I was proud of it; yes, sir. 
Senator COOK. And might I suggest that in regard to the questioning by Senator Bayh, the fact that Mr. Dennis informed the Dun & Brad­street people that you were the first vice president, if the books and records of the corporation showed you to be that, he would not have been telling Dun & Bradstreet the truth if he had eliminated your name as having been listed as first vice president; would he? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't know where they got the information. I really don't know anything about that. But I suppose at the time the records show that I was not the first but a vice president. 
Senator COOK. And had he not shown them that, because the corpo­rate records exactly showed that you were, he would not have been telling Dun & Bradstreet the truth as to who the officers were; would he? 
Judge HAYN«WORTH. NO, sir; he would not. 
Senator COOK. AS a matter of fact, Mr. Harris testified that when the union was notified on February 20 that you were a vice president of the corporation, he testified that they received the information that in fact you were by reason of a Dun & Bradstreet report, so there is no question about that, and you made no effort to deny it; is that correct ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO ; I have not. 
Senator COOK. NOW, when it comes to being prejudiced, Judge Haynsworth, I have got to say that I think everybody around this table is prejudiced. I am prejudiced toward everybody in this Com­monwealth of Kentucky who saw fit to send me to the U.S. Senate, so I expect if I were to take a position of high judicial responsibility, someone might say that apparently I wasn't supposed to sit on any cases that might come' in the name of the Commonwealth of Ken­tucky. So let's get to the Brunswick situation. 
You wish you had never heard of the Brunswick Corp. stock; don't you ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I do indeed. 
.Senator COOK. And the fact that you own 1,000 shares of Brunswick has caused a great deal of turmoil to you; has it not ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes; certainly it has. 
Senator COOK. We are all aware of that. Judge, coming out of the 
elevator when we came back for the afternoon hearing someone from the press was on the elevator and made some remark about they are having a big argument between the statutes and the canons. Well, now, the statutory law is what prevails in this Nation; is it not? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It is, sir. 
Senator COOK. And the statutes of the United States in regard to whether you should or should not sit are not by canon 29, not by canon 26, although they are extremely important, and they are vitally im­portant to you and to me, but the law that prescribes whether you should or should not is found in 28 U.S.C. 455; is not? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It is. Of course I don't find any inconsistency really. The canons themselves I think ought to be construed in keep­ing with the statute. 
Senator COOK. And that statute says that any justice or judge of the United States shall disqualify himself in any case in which he has a substantial interest ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes; it does. 
Senator COOK. NOW, let's get back to the fact that there were 22 days that lapsed between filing for a motion for a new trial and the fact that the litigants on the 26th of March filed a petition for exten­sion of time. I would like to read into the record the rules. It is rule 34, section 2, and it reads as follows: 
Whenever any justice of this court is empowered by law or under any pro­visions of these rules to extend the time within which a party may petition for a writ of certiorari or file in this court his record on appeal or any brief or paper, an application seeking such extension shall be timely if it is presented to the clerk within the period sought to be extended. 
So if they fail to file with the clerk within that time, it was not timely, is that correct ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. That is correct. 
Senator COOK. NOW, the motion and subsequent motions continued in your court even though the case went up to the Supreme Court, because there was still a pending motion in your court in August, and yet the writ of certiorari was denied on June 3, is that correct ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. The last motion that they filed, the motion to reconsider denial of the motion to extend the time got misplaced. I don't know whether it was in the clerks' office or mine, but somewhere it was misplaced, and for a couple of months I don't know where it was, but it was found, and then we acted upon it. 
Senator COOK. Judge, let me ask you this. In regard to the Senator's remarks about the interest in Carolina Vend-A-Matic, except for the fact that Carolina Vend-A-Matic did business with affiliates of Deer­ing Milliken, you had no interest in Deering Milliken whatsoever? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did not. 
Senator COOK. YOU have not to this day ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. 
Senator COOK. Mr. Chairman, I might suggest that many things that the Senator from Indiana has said I agree wholeheartedly with, but I am afraid in this instance, and I only say this as a member of this committee and as a lawyer, that the standards that somehow or other are being proposed I am afraid are standards that no nominee to the Supreme Court of the United States in the future will ever be able to meet. 
I am afraid that if we say to the judges of this Nation, or to the lawyers, because obviously in 1956, and when you started Carolina Vend-A-Matic you had no knowledge that you would even be asked to sit on the Fourth Circuit 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. 
Senator COOK. And obviously by the farthest stretch of your imagination you never dreamed that you would be asked to be a nominee to the Supreme Court of the United States ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir, I did not. 
Senator COOK. You were by the testimony of your fellow lawyers and by the affidavits that have been presented, you were an outstand­ing lawyer at the bar. You represented your clients and you repre­sented those clients who wanted you to represent them, and it would be very difficult for a major law firm in your community in South Carolina who represented corporations not to represent a number of textile firms; wouldn't it ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes. Well, it is a textile section. If you have corporate clients you are going to have textile clients. 
Senator COOK. And I might suggest, Judge Haynsworth, that when it was suggested that you had some $16,000 to buy this stock, I saw a lot of oohs and ahs from the first two tables on each side of the aisle. I might suggest that the people on each side of the aisle in the 
first two tables, they would probably get larger raises if the presi­
dents of their corporations didn't have those big accounts so they 
might buy stock periodically. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. This reminds me of the story I heard a lawyer in 
Asheville tell to my father. Many years ago there was a vacancy on 
the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. Mr. Tom Rollins was in our 
law office and my father said, "Tom, I would like to see you appointed 
to that place. I can get the bar head to endorse you." 
He said he appreciated it "but I am not going to let you do it 
because I remember a story about a friend of mine~down in Alabama 
that was recommended by a bar group for a Federal judgeship, and 
he disappeared a few days later. They tried to find out the cause of 
his disappearance, but the only thing they ever found was that right 
after the President announced his nomination he got a telegram 
saying: "Flee at once, all is discovered." 
I am frank to state I appreciate what Tom Rollins meant. I think 
if I was ever offered an appointment I would flee at once. 
Also, I expect you feel about the Brunswick stock like the story they tell down in North Carolina about the fellow that got to be administrator of his father's estate and he got involved in all kinds of controversies and litigations. He finally confessed that "I have had so much trouble as administrator of my father, I am almost sorry the old man died." 
I guess you are sorry, too. Senator COOK. Mr. Chairman, there is just one thing I would like to put into the record. 
Judge Haynsworth, I will be very frank with you. I was far more disturbed about the Brunswick case that I have ever been about Carolina Vend-A-Matic. I thought there was a serious question. And I must confess to you that I wish it had not occurred and I expect you wish it had not occurred either. 
Judge HAYISTSWORTH. I do, too, Senator. 
Senator COOK. In regard to this real problem that I had, I contacted one whom I consider to be one of the finest lawyers in the Common­wealth of Kentucky, Mr. John Tarrant, of the law firm of Bullitt, Dawson and Tarrant, which probably until recently was the largest law firm in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. 
I had a long talk with him and he wrote to me and I would like to put this letter into the record if you do not mind, Mr. Chairman. 
He read and got some of the other lawyers in that firm to read Brunswick versus Long, and I will only read you the last three para­graphs or four. 
Beach also asserted a rather ridiculous claim for punitive damages in the sum of $50,000. 
The very maximum amount involved (including the ridiculous $50,000) was $140,000. 
Whether Brunswick won or lost the case could not possibly have made any material difference to its stockholders. No great principle of law was involved and such as it was, it was confined purely to South Carolina law which was con­trolling on the Federal Court. 
Brunswick had outstanding 18,479,969 shares of common stock. If the full $90,000 of future rents for all seven years unexpired term of the lease had been recovered by Beach, it would have only received $90,000 which is less than 1/2 cent per share of Brunswick's 18,479,969 shares of stock outstanding. This would translate into % of 1 cent per share on the 1,000 shares of stock owned by Judge Haynsworth, or the grand total of $5.00. 
If a claim of conflict of interest is asserted in connection with this decision, I think it is the most ridiculous position I ever heard of. Any man of intellectual integrity should be ashamed to raise it. 
Best regards.
Sincerely. 
JOHN E. TAKEANT. 
I would like to put that in the record as from one I consider one of the finest lawyers in the United States. 
The CHAIRMAN. It will be admitted. 
Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I received a telegram and a letter from Edith Throckmorton, Mont­gomery County Branch of the National Association for the Advance­ment of Colored People. 
I request that these be made a part of the record at this hearing. 
The CHAIRMAX. It will be admitted. 
Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
Mr. Chairman, it occurs to me that this committee finds itself be­tween two very serious dangers at this point in this hearing. We have the constitutional responsibility to insure that those people nominated by the President for membership on the Supreme Court are in every way the kind of people who will inspire confidence and trust in our judicial system. And whenever Pandora's box is opened, we have to run around and track down all of the difficulties and troubles that are released to the satisfaction of ourselves and of the entire country. 
But there are other questions at stake here as Senator Cook has just commented. There is a deterrent factor that I think we have to con­sider, and that is how our actions reflect on the future. We want to be sufficiently strict that we make it perfectly clear that no one without the cleanest kind of record is going to pass this test. But I don't think wTe want to reverse one of the great traditions of the American bar, the tradition of the independence of the judiciary, which was established with so much difficulty by our ancestors as long ago as Edward Coke in his struggle with the executive in England. 
I wouldn't suggest that the few questions that I want to ask, that I am trying to set up the kind of tests which make a judge, any judge in the United States, feel that he is going to be answerable in some other place for the honest judicial opinions that he has given in his court, which are consistent with his conscience. 
Judge Haynsworth, I think we have reached the stage in dealing with Carolina Vend-A-Matic where it has become a subjective matter. We all know the objective facts. What is important now, reflected into the future, into the period of your service on the Supreme Court, is what was in your mind, and that is pretty hard to find out. That is like proving damages in a back injury case. It is pretty difficult. 
Would you describe just what went on when there was a directors' meeting of Carolina Vend-A-Matic ? Where did you meet and what went on at those meetings ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. We met at lunch as a rule. 
Senator MATHIAS. Where? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Sometimes at a hotel. It changed from time to time. We met on a certain day of a week in a certain place until that changed. Senator MATHIAS. What was the relationship between the directors? They were all close friends? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. We were all close friends. We talked on all kinds of things and sometimes we wouldn't even mention Vend-A-Matic. When there was something to talk about it we would, but the meetings themselves were extremely informal. 
Senator MATHIAS. Did the manager of the company describe pros­pects for new business to the directors ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I am sure on occasion he did, or he would mention the fact that a new location had been obtained somewhere. 
Senator MATHIAS. In the case of Deering Milliken did he ever de­scribe any prospective new business, in the sense that they might pro-ride a site for machines ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I am sure he never mentioned it in those terms. Now I don't know that I ever heard him say that Magnolia was a prospect or that he had an installation there, but I just don't know. 
Senator MATHIAS. When he would bid for a location, would he be authorized by the directors to make such a bid, or did he have plenary authority to act for the company? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. He did that on his own. Senator MATHIAS. The board of directors did not individually act on those ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. We looked to him for overall financial results only. 
Senator MATHIAS. Have you ever had occasion to advise either coun­sel or the parties to a proceeding of some personal interest of yours that might or might not affect your feeling about your sitting on a case ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, I cannot recall an instance in which I, myself, have had such an interest that it was brought up, but mem­bers of my court have reported to me, and then I brought that to the attention of the counsel, but I don't recall an instance in which it was my interest that was the one involved. I have done this on behalf of members of my court. 
Senator MATHIAS. It is a hypothetical question, to which of course there can only be a hypothetical answer, but had you been a stock­holder of Brunswick at the beginning of that hearing 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I would not have sat on it. 
Senator MATHIAS. YOU would not have sat on it at all ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I would not have sat on it. 
Senator MATHIAS. YOU consider that your interest was substantial, then ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, I do, without question, though it was not in the outcome in terms of that, but much more substantial than I think a judge should run the risk of being critized. 
Senator MATHIAS. AS I recall the course of events from Judge Winter here this morning, there were two motions before the court which grew out of the Brunswick case, which did come in after your acquisition of the Brunswick stock. Were these motions discretionary in your judgment? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir. The first one, of course, was a pro­posal to extend the time to file a petition. It was filed well after the time had expired, and the later one which said the same thing. 
This would be denied in I don't know how large a proportion it would be, but it would take something like a showing that the lawyer was in an auto wreck and had been in the hospital unconscious, for 30-odd days, and he is now conscious, and it appears that there was a fact of which we were unaware, and that that fact would change the result. Yes, we could find a way to do something about it. 
Senator MATHIAS. And only to that extent did you consider it to be a discretionary matter in which the court would exercise its Judge HAYNSWORTH. This motion was under no circumstances of the kind that any judge of the court ever thought should be granted. 
Senator MATHIAS. And was it that circumstance which made you feel that it was not necessary to advice either your brothers on the bench or the counsel or the parties of the change in your own position ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think the alternative was to have the case completely reheard before three new judges, and it seemed a very poor alternate. 
Senator MATHIAS. What changes did you make in Judge Winter's draft opinion which was submitted to you ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I, myself, made none, but one of my law clerks that year was a local boy, and he knew something about this local proceeding for the repossession of personal estate. He read it and he thought that Judge Winter's use of some terms in connection with that statutory thing were inexact, and he made a little memo to that effect. 
Judge Winter, himself, this was brand new to him, the procedure part of it. I made no memo at all to him. I handed him what my law clerk had done, and told him if he wanted to use it, fine, if he didn't, that was fine, too. I did not condition anything I did on his use of what this law clerk brought up. The changes that he made were purely tech­nical corrections that had no effect on the reasoning or the conclusion of the opinion. 
Senator MATHIAS. One of those cases sounds like the voice of Esau and the hand of Jacob. 
Now, had there been a system of judicial disclosure—and let me say that I have advocated that there be Congressional disclosure. Perhaps there should be a uniform rule throughout the Federal Government. 
Had there been disclosure in this case, had everyone been aware of the facts, really a lot that has happened here in the last couple of weeks would not have occurred, because we would all have been advised in advance of the situation. What is your view of this, because that is going to be one of the matters which will face the Supreme Court in the coming months ?
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I have appeared before the Subcommittee on Improvements in Judicial Machinery in support of a requirement that 
the judges make financial disclosure. The particular proposal that we had in mind then was a requirement that each judge, each year, file a report with the Judicial Conference of the United States. It was contemplated that it would be made available there to a Commission of Judges who could inquire into judicial fitness, and to this committee. 
Senator MATHIAS. When did you make that recommendation? Do you remember the date ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, Senator, I don't, but I believe it was last May. Senator Tydings would know or the record would show, but I believe it may have been earlier last spring. It was before the Judicial Conference in June, before the question arose. 
Senator MATHIAS. That information, of course, would only be avail­able to the conference and to official circles. It would not be available to parties who are counsel ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. It would not be unless the Judicial Conference itself released it, and there was a provision for its release, I have been in support of that, and I have been asked too if I were a Justice of the Supreme Court, would I comply with any requirement that the Con­ference might adopt with respect to circuit court judges and district judges, and of course I would. 
Senator MATHIAS. Judge, there have been claims made that you have demonstrated bias in some cases, and I again want to reiterate that I don't believe that a judge should have to answer elsewhere for his honest decisions in court, but I think if you take a line of cases— it is late, you have been here a long time, I don't want to prolong this, but perhaps the easiest and quickest way for me to do this is to iv }: you a series of quick questions. 
They are all on matters which are on the record, but I think in order to get them into this record, we have to do it that way, through lead­ing questions. I think it is the efficient way to do it. 
For instance, in the case Coppeidge v. Franklin County Board of Education, in which I believe you wrote the opinion 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. TWO opinions. 
Senator MATHIAS. \XY essence the holding was, and this was prior to the Supreme Court's ruling in the case, in essence the ruling was that freedom of choice plans, when accompanied by acts of violence and instances of coercion were simply illusory, and lhat a much higher standard should be required of local school boards i]i dealing with the racial segregation question. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I think so, yes. 
Senator MATHIAS. That is reducing a complicated situation to a minimum of words. In case of Gummings v. City of Charleston, you participated in the case ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I don't recall it by that name, sir. 
Senator MATHIAS. That was a case involving a public golf course, a golf course case. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, yes, I do. 
Senator MATHIAS. YOU voted to accelerate integration in that case ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I did. 
Senator MATHIAS. In the case of Wall v. Stanley County Board of education, we can supply the citations for the record, you voted to void the discriminatory discharge of a Negro teacher? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator MATHIAS. In the case of Brown v. County Board of Charles 
City, you voted to order an integration of the faculty ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MATHIAS. In the case of Warner v. County School Board 
of Arlington, you voted to deny a white student's claim of reverse 
discrimination in the redrawing of boundaries? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. Senator MATHIAS. In the case of Wheeler v. Durham Board of 
Education, you voted to enjoin the school board from discriminatory 
application of the North Carolina Pupil Placement Law ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, I did. Senator MATHIAS. In Felder v. Hartnett Board of Education, you 
voted to order school boards to admit all new students to the schools of their choice, and to advise parents of freedom of choice at the time of the initial assignment? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir, and this was quite an advance be­yond what had been done.
Senator MATHIAS. NOW, what was the state of the law, as far as the Supreme Court rulings that were in effect at that time? You said it was an advance of what had been done ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I was referring to the local situation. Senator MATHIAS. That case was decided in 1965 ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. They had a local pupil placement act which 
was really not fair. Anyone had to run quite a gauntlet to get into the school he wanted, and we held that he could not be required to run such a gauntlet, and that he could go where he pleased, and that his parents must be informed that he had a right to go where he pleased. 
Senator MATHIAS. In Wheeler v. Durham Board of Education, the court voided boundaries drawn with an intent to perpetuate segre­gation. Did you vote with the majority in that case? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator MATHIAS. And in Chamber v. Hendersonville County Board of Education, the court held that the burden of proof to show lack of discrimination rests upon the school board with a history of discrimination, and not upon the Negro plaintiffs. Do you recall how you voted in that case ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. With the majority. There was a dissent, I 
believe, but not by me. Senator MATHIAS. That is all, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Senator Griffin. Senator GRIFFIN. Judge Haynsworth, I share the concern that has 
been expressed by my colleagues, Senator Mathias and Senator Cook, that we want to have high standards for those who go on the Supreme Court. And, I agree with Senator Cook that these standards should not be so high that no mortal could possibly meet them. 
However, when it comes to the Canons of Judicial Ethics, I think that the Congress and the people are looking for a strict construc­tionist. ^Recognizing how little interest you had in Brunswick, I be­lieve this case has served a purpose in so far as it sheds some light as to the question of whether or not you are a strict constructionist in the interpretation and application of the Canons of Judicial Ethics. 
Like you, I wish the Brunswick case had never arisen. I think that the Brunswick case certainly has got to be put in perspective, but if 
you did have discretion to provide for a rehearing, if there was an act involving the exercise of judicial discretion in denying the petition to extend the time for appeal, then certainly a strict construe* ion of Canon 26 as it has been interpreted by the American Bar Association would indicate some disregard of that Canon. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Senator, if there had been any indication by any judge on the panel or any other member of my court, any doubt of this result, it would have been reheard by three other judges, but there was no such indication. Judge Winter's opinion had been ap­proved by every judge of the court, and to schedule it to be reheard before three more would have been a purely futile act, very futile. If it had not been I would have done something else. 
Senator GRIFFITH. I appreciate that, and I listened to this explana­tion before. I yield to my colleague from Maryland. 
Senator MATHIAS. On that very point, I think we all agreed Judge Winter has advanced the thought today that where a Canon and the statute might be in conflict, of course, the statute takes precedence, but where the Canon sets a higher standard, and I am looking now to the future, where the Canon sets a higher standard than the statute, what is your view as to how a judge should conduct himself ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Well, to the extent that the Statute requires the judge to sit, where lie does not have a substantial interest in the case, the Statute I would say controls, except I would go on that the Canons, as I read them, apart from this interpretation, which of course is not necessarily the final word on what the Canon means, the Canons can be construed I think with the Statutes and they are not in conflict with them. 
The Canons should work for an interpretation of the Statute which favors the removal of a judge, if there is any possible question about whether or not he should sit, and this is the way I think it should operate. 
Senator MATHIAS. The doubt should be resolved. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. In favor of the judge's removal of himself. 
Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much. 
Senator GRIFFIN. Judge, I am going to focus on another portion of your testimony in connection with the relationship of Mr. McCall and his purchase of securities for you. You indicated that you relied upon him completely, completely depended upon his advice, always followed his advice, et cetera, et cetera. 
Now, I don't know whether you really meant that or not, but frankly, this disturbs me a little. 
The CHAIRMAN. What was the question? 
Senator GRIFFIN". The testimony that Judge Haynsworth completely relied upon the advice of Mr. McCall in the purchase of securities. Let me develop) what I am about to say: Canon 1 says, and I quote: The assumption of the office of judge casts upon the incumbent duties in respect to his personal conduct which concerns relations to the state and its inhabitants, the litigants before him. the principles of law, the practitioners of law in his court, jurors and attendants who aid him in the administration of his function. 
Accordingly, you can't delegate to a stockbroker the duty to follow what the Canons of Judicial Ethics require in connection with the acquisition of stock. You would agree with that, wouldn't you, Judge Haynsworth ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, I would, and I did not mean to suggest 
that or anything else, but what I do mean, as I attempted to say, a 
judge in my court has a very full-time job. He does not have time to 
attempt to be an expert in stock or in securities. 
Senator GRIFFIN. I appreciate that. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. And I simply in that field am inexpert, and 
so when I have funds to invest, I go to him, who is supposed to know 
something about it. 
Senator GRIFFIN. But Mr. McCall testified that he was not aware of 
or did not take into account your peculiar position and judicial re­sponsibilities when advising you. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. He would not, but I would, and if he advised 
me to buy something I thought I should not own, I would not buy. 
Senator GRIFFIN. That is what I believe is important to get into this record. Blindly following his advice might precipitate an infringe­ment on the canons of ethics. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Oh, no. His advice would be only in terms of "I recommend this as a good investment," and he would tell me some­thing about it. If there was reason for me not to buy it, why then, that is for me to say, and I would say no. 
Senator GRIFFIN. What if he recommended Brunswick and there was a case pending in your court ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. And I knew it was, I would not have bought it. 
Senator GRIFFIN. I wish you hadn't. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I wish I hadn't, too. 
Senator GRIFFIN. That is all, Mr. Chairman. 
Senator ERVIN. One thing I would like to clear up. Senator Bayh said something about a complaint that the Department of Labor had made about ARA. I ask you if when you received the ARA stock in exchange for the stock for Carolina Vend-A-Matic, if you did not simultaneously make an agreement about disposing of the ARA stock? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. I sold it immediately. 
Senator ERVIN. SO if there is any complaint against ARA by the Department of Labor, that complaint arose either before you acquired any ARA stock, or after you had disposed of your ARA stock ? 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Yes, sir. 
Senator ERVIN. Thank you. 
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Judge Haynsworth. 
Senator BAYH. Will the Senator yield? I want to make absolutely 
certain to put this in proper perspective, that I was not accusing the Judge of any impropriety in relationship to his ARA stock, but sug­gesting that this is the type of procedure you have to make when you are an officer of a corporation about to merge with another corpora­tion, you find yourself merging with that corporation, and that cor­poration has a cease and desist order placed against it by the FTC, this is the kind of thing. 
I want to say one other word. We have been talking back and forth here about cases, canons and rules and this type of thing. I would think most of us would have to suggest that what is finally deter­mining is what that body on which you may sit says about the canons and the rules and the statutes. 
At the risk of being repetitive, what that court has said in a most recent case about ethics, one "must not only be unbiased but avoid even the appearance of bias," after he takes into consideration all of these things, and that is why I must say I take some issue with my friend from Kentucky and his learned constituent, Mr. Torrent, that anyone with any intellectual integrity could not possibly raise the Brunswick or perhaps even the Carolina vending machine matter. 
Senator COOK. Will the Senator yield? I think you will find that that letter deals specifically with Brunswick v. Long. I don't think it has anything to do 
Senator BAYH. Specifically T don't think anybody who has the repu­tation of Mr. Torrent at the time that point was raised could have had any question about the propriety of it being raised, and even Judge Winter himself suggested that if he had been in the same situation, he would not have acted accordingly. 
Senator COOK. I can assure that probably Mr. Torrent would not have acted in that May, either, but you brought up another question, Senator, that I would like to pursue just a little bit. 
Are you saying that if you and I hold stock in the XYZ Corpora­tion, as stockholders, and that arrangements are made by the corporate structure to sell to another corporation, that it is our duty as sellers of that stock for which we are to be paid to find out whether the cor­poration that is buying us, and we are liquidating out, whether that corporation has any pending lawsuits or whether that corporation has any situation involved in any agency of the Federal Government ? 
Senator BAYH. If the Senator would like to read the letter that was sent to the Senator from Indiana from the FTC, you are welcome to, or I will put it in the record, but the suggestion 
Senator COOK. I am merely asking you the question. Senator BAYH. It is general knowledge in the vending machine busi­ness that this type of concern was being expressed by FTC at ARA. Senator COOK. That has nothing to do with the question I am asking you, Senator. 
Senator BAYH. It surely does. If I am a member of a small corpora­tion like Carolina Vend-A-Matic, and I know that FTC says to ARA, "You are not supposed to assume any more companies," and I go ahead, do I end up with clean hands ? I don't think I do. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. Of course, I did not know any such thing. 
Senator BAYH. I am sure you didn't. I am sure you didn't, but you are in that rather nebulous gray area again where you are an officer of the corporation. 
Judge HAYNSWORTH. NO, sir, I was not a director. I was not an offi­cer. I offered to sell my stock—when was this investigation, in 1962 or 1964? I was not a director. I was not an officer. I was nothing. I was not a director, not an officer. I was a stockholder, that is all. 
Senator BAYH. At what time ? Judge HAYNSWORTH. I first offered my stock to be sold, and when the arrangement with ARA was under way, I was not an official. 
Senator COOK. AS I understand the Senator, he is saying that if I own 100 shares of stock in Gulf Oil Co., and as a stockholder a proxy is sent around to me and it says, "Do you want to sell your stock or do you wish to merge and take so many shares of stock in Sinclair, or do you wish to sell your stock," then it is my duty at that time, be­fore I agree as a shareholder of Gulf to become part of Sinclair, that it is my responsibility to find out whether Sinclair has been estopped from buying any other corporations, or whether they have been put in a position where they may have any claims by the Federal Govern­ment against them? Otherwise that it in some manner makes me re­sponsible as a stockholder who is selling out ? 
Senator BAYH. I don't know what that has to do with the current situation, about a one-seventh owner of a corporation. The vice presi­dent is the director and his wife is secretary. 
Senator COOK. Senator, you are not paying attention to the record. Senator, the record shows that at the time that the sale was made to ARA, he was not these things, and that at that time he made an ar­rangement immediately to sell his stock, that he was not going to hold any stock in ARA, and did not intend to hold any stock in ARA, and yet somehow or other you are making him responsible for the actions of ARA, and its past actions. I think we ought to be fair about this thing, and in this regard I think we ought to get our chronology in order. 
The CHAIRMAN. We will recess until 10:30 in the morning. Thank you.