
GRASSLEY:  Well, Judge, I see you got here without my walking you in.  
        
KAVANAUGH:  Good morning.  
GRASSLEY:  Good morning and welcome back, of course. And that's to all the people that are here for three days, as well as the people that might be here just for a few minutes. Everybody's welcome.  
      Your testimony yesterday, over nearly 30-hour day, made very clear that you have strong command of the law, and even Ranking Member Feinstein said that you were forthcoming in your answers to questions.  
      Your 12 years of exceptional judicial service and that obviously includes your 307 opinions that you wrote and hundreds more that you joined in make you very well-qualified to receive a promotion from the second highest court in the land to the highest court in the land. And we will have the American Bar Association in tomorrow that will say particularly the same thing.  
GRASSLEY:  I'm particularly impressed with your lifetime of public service, that tells something about you, but also more so than your 12 years, what you've done as an outstanding professor. You've talked a great deal about being a coach for your daughters. You've talked a great deal about volunteering for meal service. I've only done that once in my life, so and I should do it more, but you do it regularly, so you're to be complimented. And most importantly, being a father.  
      And, of course, I've enjoyed conversation with your wife and two daughters. And my wife was here yesterday and she was talking about that all last night talking to your wife, I mean.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  And I heard some of my colleagues on the I've I've had some of my colleagues, as I get into some of the business of this committee, complain again yesterday about publicly releasing committee confidential documents.  
      But anyone who didn't get documents released to use during the hearing, I have to say, as I've tried to cooperate and make everything available to everybody that they wanted, they only have themselves to blame if they didn't get the documents they wanted.  
      This is what I did a long time ago:  sent a letter to each member of this committee on August 22nd, and a short quote from that is, quote, "I invite all members of the committee to submit to me by noon, August the 28th a list of document control numbers specifically identifying committee confidential documents or documents public released with redactions that a member wishes to use in the hearing."  
      And I said I would work with the former and current presidents to secure their public release, and that meant working with lawyers and the Department of Justice on redaction and all that stuff.  
      Senator Klobuchar was the only senator who requested the release of specific documents. And we secured their release and as she told me yesterday, she gets an "A" for her cooperation she does get an "A" for cooperation.  
      Every senator who complained about this process needs then only look to Senator Klobuchar as an example to see that my process was fair and would have resulted in public release of documents before the hearing if they had only asked me.  
GRASSLEY:  But then yesterday and I think we've accommodated these senators but Senator Leahy, Coons, Blumenthal and Booker asked that I obtain the public release of certain confidential documents, and I've attempted to do so despite the untimely request. These senators could have made the same request last week, but maybe that would have deprived them of more talk that they've been able to express about my hiding of documents.  
      With respect to Senator Booker's question to Judge Kavanaugh, my friend from New Jersey asked the nominee to answer some questions regarding an e-mail exchange from over 15 years ago without showing the nominee the e-mail in question. And then you know what happened? The senator from New Jersey blamed it on the fact that the e-mail was labeled committee confidential.  
      Well, there was nothing preventing any senator from asking me before the hearing to get this document publicly released.  
GRASSLEY:  In fact, the request was made to release these documents for the first time last night, after the senator asked the questions of the nominee.  
      We didn't get some requests in until after midnight. And we, quite frankly, had to have quite an argument with people in the Department of Justice to get these released and all the redactions that have to be done.  
      What senator would want to release their e-mails with all the e-mails and everything without redaction of phone numbers, Social Security numbers, addresses, and Social Security numbers ?   
      That all has to be done under law to reduce this.  
      But I think that we have the Department of Justice cooperating with that, so before this day is over, members will have the documents that they need to ask the questions that they wanted to ask.  
      Now, before I ask my questions and one senator wants to make a 30-second comment, I'm willing to turn to that, but let me say each of our 21 senators on the committee that get to ask questions for a 20-minute round, every couple hours we'll take a break, and and that would include a lunch break.  
      And, Judge, if you need a break at any time, have your staff inform my staff.  
      And as is the standard practice for every judicial nominee, the FBI conducts a background investigation and provides to the Senate a background report. Moreover, like with prior nominees, including Justices Kagan and Gorsuch, there are a number of presidential records that are restricted by federal law from public release because they contain sensitive information, including highly confidential advice delivered to the president, and personal identifying information such as full names, date of birth and Social Security numbers.  
      So at the end of the questions today, we'll move, as we have before, into a closed session with a nominee where we'll review the FBI report and any committee confidential records that any member would like to discuss.  
      This is standard practice that we do for all Supreme Court nominees, and every member is invited to participate.  
      Now, I would like to call on Senator Hirono.  
HIRONO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  
      I wanted to set the record straight on a matter that was brought up late last night with regard to me and my questioning of Judge Kavanaugh and his relationship to Judge Kozinski and whether I would ask Judge Watford the same questions.  
      I'd like to quote from my response to the Washington Times on September 4th, 2018. That quote is and this is from me, "If President Trump would be so enlightened as to withdraw Judge Kavanaugh's nomination and nominate Judge Watford for the Supreme Court, I would certainly ask Judge Watford about his relationship with Judge Kozinski."  
      Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Booker, before you speak, I hope that you're not going to say that we have not gotten the document you want and all that sort of thing, because we worked my staff was here till 3:00 trying to accommodate everybody that asked for documents. Would you proceed, please?  
BOOKER:  I appreciate that, sir.  
      And, sir, the very section of the process that you read points out the absurdity of the process, and that's what's deeply frustrating to me and deeply disappointing.  
      The process you read, you invite the committee members to submit to me by noon on August 28 a list of document control numbers specifically identifying the committee confidential documents, or documents publicly released with with redactions, that the members wish to use in the hearing, so long as it's a reasonable request so no guarantee that we'll be able to use them but to submit the ones we want to ask questions about, and then you'll go back to President Trump, go back to President Bush for review.  
      Now, I I see that plainly, remember sir, if I could just finish my my my point, we were we had a number of those documents released to us the night before, and to think that we could somehow ask you about the documents, reveal to you what questions we wanted to ask; and then it's not even your determination, it goes back to Bill Burke, who is then making a determination about documents.  
      So the specific document that I brought up is a great illustration of the absurdity of the process. I brought up a document entitled "racial profiling."  
      And by the way, I asked the the the candidate about his views today about that issue. It's a controversial issue, and that document actually does reveal his thinking about that issue at the time.  
      And the fact that there is nothing in that document that's personal information, there's nothing national security-related, the fact that it was labeled as committee confidential, exposes that this process, sir, is a bit of a sham, that we are now this has never been done before we are holding back not only not only holding back documents, labeling committee confidential, but not even giving us the time to review those documents.  
      In addition to that, this is just the tip of the iceberg of all the documents that will continue to be released, I assume, up until the time that we have a vote on the Senate floor and beyond that.  
      Do you I'm sure you can understand, sir, how it puts all of us in a very difficult situation when it's not you, it's not it's somebody you have to go then go back to a person named Bill Burke to decide if some document who is an associate who is an associate and colleague of the nominee to figure out which documents are going to be released.  
      And I I if if and by the way, if these all these documents were things, as you characterized them, they were personal information, if these were things that were delicate information, but as I read these, the documents we got the night before the hearing, including the ones we got before the hearing, I find that I'm I'm actually flabbergasted that so many of these things are not controversial whatsoever, but bring up pertinent issues that we should have a time to digest and to ask the candidate about.   
CORNYN:  Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  I think can I I'll call on you, but can I think I ought to respond to the senator. I'd like to respond in at least on two points.  
      One, the word "sham."  
      Senator Leahy, chairman of the committee, accepted documents committee confidential. During Gorsuch nomination, we accepted committee documents committee confidential. At that particular time, Senator Feinstein asked for 19 documents, as we're getting documents for you now in the same way.  
      So you read from my letter and you called it a sham. Was it a sham when we did it for Gorsuch? Was it a sham when we when Senator Leahy did it?   
      And the reason we did it is so that we could get documents so you could review them almost from, I think, August the 5th or sometime maybe it was August the 10th so you could start on it very early.  
      And then don't forget that documents come committee confidential, and then don't forget on a regular rolling basis they're not committee confidential and then put on our website, so that 300 million people can view them if they want to.  
GRASSLEY:  And then, the second point about the lawyer for President Bush, all of our conversations last night were with the Department of Justice. Now, I hope you understand that these people in the Department of Justice are people that are there for years under both Republican and Democrat administrations.  
      They're supposed to be non-political, I hope they're non-political, they're civil servants. We ought to respect their judgment as they try to take care of the privacy of people by redacting late into the night Social Security numbers, phone numbers, cell numbers and all those sorts of things.  
      Senator Cornyn, and then we also have Senator Whitehouse, but I want to go and let him comment.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Senator Grassley, may I be recognized after Senator Whitehouse?  
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
CORNYN:  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  
      I was disappointed to see last night that some of our colleagues are unwilling or unable to conduct themselves in this hearing with regular order in accordance with the rules of the committee and the rules of the Senate.  
      I know last night some of our colleagues even tried to cross-examine the the nominee about documents, but refused to let him even read them. Members of the Senate and members of Congress generally are privy to sensitive information, including classified information on occasion. And we're expected to protect that information for all of the obvious reasons.  
      And it's inappropriate to raise these in an open session before the committee. And I think our colleagues understand that; but, nevertheless, decided to go ahead anyway. So I just think it's important that we remind one another that there are clear rules about the discussion of confidential material and that there can be consequences to the violations of those rules.  
      And this idea that somehow President Bush, when his lawyer and the president decide that information represents legal advice or other protected information that was given to the president during the time he was President of the United States, and that somehow he is unable to make a claim of privilege or that once the claim is made in consultation with his private lawyer that it that would be not respected by the Senate is outrageous.  
      And so, I just I thought we were doing pretty well yesterday, but things went off the rails it looks like last night. And I hope we will return to a hearing process that respects the rules of the Senate and that treats each other and particularly the nominee with the civility that he and this process is entitled to.  
      And I'd encourage our colleagues to avoid the temptation 
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
CORNYN:  to either violate the Senate rules or to treat the witness unfairly by cross-examining him about a document, and refusing to show it to him, and violating the confidentiality of some of these documents as requested by President Bush in consultation with his private lawyer.  
BOOKER:  Sir, may I respond? Because it was a direct it was directly 
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
BOOKER:  invoking may may I respond, sir? No Senate rule accounts for Bill Burke's partisan review of the documents. No Senate rule and no history of the Senate accounts for what is going on right now.  
      The the there was a that that was following this archives' partisan this partisan operative, following his involvement in this process, that, I think, in my opinion, undermined the process. And the idea that we could somehow go through your lengthy process in these documents or, many of these documents were dumped on us in the last minute.  
BOOKER:  But to Senator Cornyn actually made a very good point. I knowingly violated the rules that were put forth. And I'm told that the committee confidential rules have no consequences.  
      And so, sir, I come from a long line, as all of us do as Americans, who understand what that kind of civil disobedience is, and I understand the consequences.  
      So I am right now before your process is finished, I'm going to release the e-mail about racial profiling, and I understand that the penalty comes with potential ousting from the Senate. And if Senator Cornyn believes that I violated Senate rules, I I openly invite and accept the consequences of my team releasing that e-mail right now.  
      And I'm releasing it to expose that, number one, the e-mails that are being withheld from the public have nothing to do with national security, nothing to jeopardize the sanctity of those ideals that I hold dear.  
      Instead, what I'm releasing this document right now to show, sir, is that we have a process here for a person the highest office in the land, for a lifetime appointment. We're rushing through this before me and my colleagues can even read and digest the information.  
GRASSLEY:  Can I ask you 
BOOKER:  This and I want 
GRASSLEY:  Can I ask you how long you're going to say the same thing three or four times?  
BOOKER:  No, sir. I'm saying 
GRASSLEY:  How long do you want to take?  
BOOKER:  I'm saying I'm knowingly violating the rules.  
GRASSLEY:  OK.  
BOOKER:  Senator Cornyn has called me out for it 
GRASSLEY:  How many time do you want to tell us?  
BOOKER:  I say sir, I'm saying right now that I'm releasing committee confidential documents.  
CORNYN:  Mr. Chairman 
BLUMENTHAL:  Mr. Chairman 
CORNYN:  since the senator invoked my name 
GRASSLEY:  Can I can I 
CORNYN:  I do insist on an opportunity to respond.  
GRASSLEY:  Yes 
CORNYN:  I did not mention his name 
GRASSLEY:  OK.  
CORNYN:  but he had mentioned my name.  
      And he's right:  Running for president is no excuse for violating the rules of the Senate or of the confidentiality of the documents that we are privy to.  
      This is no different from the senator deciding to release classified information that is deemed classified by the executive branch because you happen to disagree with the classification decision.  
      That is irresponsible and outrageous. And I hope that the senator will reconsider his decision, because no senator deserves to sit on this committee or serve in the Senate, in my view, if they decide to be a law into themselves and willingly flout the rules of the Senate and the determination of confidentiality and classification. That is irresponsible and conduct unbecoming a senator.  
      
GRASSLEY:  Well, just a minute.  
      
GRASSLEY:  I've got something I want to say.  
      I think we ought to be thinking about this is the last I've got three senators are asking for Senator Kennedy, Senator Whitehouse and senator from Connecticut 
HIRONO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like 
GRASSLEY:  So 
HIRONO:  to also be recognized.  
GRASSLEY:  So here's this is the last day. So here's something you got to think. We'll be here till midnight if you want to be here.  
      But I've been told that the Senate minority leader or somebody in the Democrat Party invoked the two-hour rule. So if the two-hour rule is invoked, you've nobody on this committee, is going to have an opportunity to do what they want to do today because this is the last day he's going to be here. And and so, I hope you don't invoke the two-hour rule.  
      So if you want to talk now before I start to ask my questions, I'll do it.   
      Senator Whitehouse was the next one and then Senator Kennedy.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And 
HIRONO:  Mr. Chairman, I'd also like to be recognized because I am in a similar situation as my colleague 
GRASSLEY:  I'd like to recognize Senator Whitehouse.  
      I think I think he asked before you did.  
KENNEDY:  He did.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Mr. Chairman, you recognized me for 30 seconds and I will take 30 seconds.  
      Lest silence implied consent, speaking for myself, I want to make it absolutely clear that I do not accept the process of this committee confidential routine that we went through. I do not accept its legitimacy. I do not accept its validity.  
      Because I don't accept its legitimacy or validity, I don't accept that I'm under any obligation. I've not made a big fight about this. I've just gone ahead with my questioning.  
      But again, lest silence implied consent, I think that that rule is as ineffectual as if the chair had unilaterally appealed the law of gravity. It simply isn't so.  
      I haven't agreed to this rule. I haven't voted on this rule. This rule does not exist in our committee or Senate rules, and I'll leave it at that.  
GRASSLEY:  Did you 
WHITEHOUSE:  Just me speaking, I am not willing to concede that there is any legitimacy to this entire committee confidential process in this hearing if 
GRASSLEY:  Was it 
WHITEHOUSE:  nothing sensitive, nothing personal, nothing classified, and nothing confidential has been released.  
GRASSLEY:  Was did you object to it when it was previously used under other Supreme Court nominees?  
WHITEHOUSE:  It was developed then through a bipartisan process 
FEINSTEIN:  That's correct.  
WHITEHOUSE:  in which only reached 
GRASSLEY:  OK.  
FEINSTEIN:  That is correct.  
GRASSLEY:  OK.  
WHITEHOUSE:  an agreement by unanimous consent effectively, not by decree.  
FEINSTEIN:  No, there was agreement between 
GRASSLEY:  OK.  
FEINSTEIN:  the chairman and the 
WHITEHOUSE:  Precisely.  
GRASSLEY:  And you 
WHITEHOUSE:  And that did not exist this time. And now you have documents that are not personal, not classified, not confidential, not sensitive that are nevertheless covered under this.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Kennedy?  
KENNEDY:  Mr. Chairman, I was in the chair last night when this issue came up. I made the call, and I wanted to explain why I made it.  
      Senator Tillis, my colleague, raised the point. I allowed Senator Booker to continue. Sometimes patience ceases to be a virtue, but I didn't think in these hearings following the chairman's example that that was that was appropriate.  
      Senator Booker examined Judge Kavanaugh about the racial disparities in this country. I gave Judge Kavanaugh, I think it was 6 minutes and 39 seconds to respond uninterrupted. So I was trying to be and will continue to that was trying to be fair to both sides, following the example of our chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Blumenthal ?  
BLUMENTHAL:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      There's been a lot of commentary over the last couple of days about how we are in uncharted and unprecedented territory here, that the process has broken down, reflecting what is happening in our nation generally. And particularly in the last couple of days with the publication of a new book and an op-ed that indicate very serious chaos and break down in other parts of government.  
      And I'm hoping that we can come together as a committee, and if there are any rules, do what we've done in the past, which is adopt them on a bipartisan basis. That's been the way that committee confidential designation.  
      It's not classification. There's no classified documents here. It's a designation. It's an arbitrary and seemingly capricious designation, designed to spare people embarrassment possibly. But all these documents belong to the people of the United States. They're covered by the Presidential Records Act and eventually they will come out.  
BLUMENTHAL:  So shame on my colleagues if they conceal them now and deny us the benefit of questioning this nominee who comes before us for the last time today. He comes before us for the last time today. This is our last opportunity, up or down, whether he's confirmed or not, to question him.  
      And like any trial lawyer, documents have to be assessed as the trial goes on, as this witness responds to our questions. We can't give the chairman a list of what documents are relevant before we hear his answers and our colleagues' questions.  
      So not only from the standpoint of there being no basis for the rules, but also to deny the fairness and effectiveness of the process; that's the reason that we're making this protest, and we are here under protest. That's the reason why I asked to adjourn so that we could consider fairly all of these documents.  
      I appreciate that Senator Grassley has decided to release the documents that I would have used yesterday. He's released the documents that Senator Booker commendably would have released, even if not reclassified or redesignated. But I want to reserve the right, I hereby reserve the right to release documents before any confirmation vote so that my colleagues can see what the truth is.  
      We are literally trying to get at the truth here. And between now and any vote on confirmation, there is the right, in my view, on the part of every member of this committee to release documents that she or he believes are appropriate. And to delegate this decision to an unappointed, and unconfirmed, and largely unknown figure Bill Burke, who used to work for the nominee is the height of irresponsibility.  
      Thank you.  
LEE:  I want to start by pointing out that when this part of the discussion started last night, I was concerned that, as with any witness in any courtroom or any proceeding before this committee, I want to make sure that when a witness is questioned about a particular document, the witness has access to that document.  
      It's not fair to the witness, a witness who has over the course of his career been involved in the creation, the authorship, the review of not just hundreds of thousands but many millions of documents in his lifetime. It's not fair to this witness or any other witness, in any other proceeding, anywhere, to not give the witness a copy and allow him to respond to it while he's being questioned about it.  
      So that's why I offered to to Senator Booker, and Senator Booker and I had a a helpful conversation with the very helpful committee staff last night, and they've agreed in the meantime to release this same document that was now the subject of it. So the process worked. It it works. We do have the ability to make these things available, to make them public so that we can be fair to Senator Booker. We can be fair to the witness, to the nominee.  
      I do want to point out, since the the the charge has been made that this process is somehow rigged, that it's charged, that it's unfair, that it's arbitrary and that it's capricious; I completely disagree. We are not dealing in a lawless environment here. We're dealing here with the Presidential Records Act. We've got documents that are the subject of privileges, privileges that that that have to be asserted.  
      Now, Bill Burke is the designee for that presidential administration and has the prerogative of asserting privileges. But through an accommodation with the Senate with the Senate Judiciary Committee to allow us to gain access to other documents to which we would never otherwise be able to have access, they they have agreed to hand those over with the understanding that we have this committee confidential process and that there are means by which we can clear documents like this one that we would otherwise not be able to clear.  
      It worked here, it's been cleared, and I think we should move forward. Thank you.  
FEINSTEIN:  Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Durbin or Senator Feinstein, whichever one wants to to go first.  
DURBIN:  I no, I defer to Senator Feinstein.  
FEINSTEIN:  Well, I will accept it. Thank you.  
      It's my understanding that by agreement with private lawyer Bill Burke, the chairman has designated 190,000 pages of Kavanaugh's records committee confidential. And by doing this, Republicans argue members can't use these documents at the hearing or release them to the public. Unlike the Intelligence Committee, and I've been a member for about two decades, the Judiciary Committee doesn't have any standing rules on how and when documents are designated committee confidential.  
      Previously, the Judiciary Committee has made material confidential only through bipartisan agreement. That has not been done in this case. So this is without precedent.  
      Republicans claim that Chairman Leahy accepted documents on a committee confidential basis during the Kagan administration. It's my understanding that those documents were processed through the National Archives, not private partisan lawyers, and Republicans agreed. Ninety-nine percent of Elena Kagan's White House records were publicly available and could be used freely by any member.  
      By contrast, the committee has only seven percent of Brett Kavanaugh's White House records, and only four percent of those are available to the public. No Senate or committee rule grants the chairman unilateral authority to designate documents committee confidential. So I have no idea how that stamp committee confidential got on these documents.  
      I sent a letter on August 10th, 2018 objecting to the blanket designation of documents as committee confidential. I offered to work with the chair; he refused. Judiciary Democrats sent the chairman a letter on August 28th, restating the objection to the chair's designation of the documents as committee confidential and requesting public release.  
      As I've looked at the documents that are committee confidential, they do not affect any of the usual standards that would deny committee confidentiality. And Mr. Chairman, I think that's a problem. I think we're entitled to all records and I think the public is entitled to all records that are appropriate and do not put forward personal information or information that otherwise should not be disclosed.  
      So I do think we have a problem and I think for the future we ought to settle that problem with some kind of a written agreement between the two sides. Whether that's an agreement between the two sides of the entire committee, or between the chairman and the ranking member I think it doesn't matter much. But I think the fact is that we should agree on who determines something is committee confidential, what the criteria are for, and the release to the public, and particularly in the event of a Supreme Court hearing.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Senator Durbin?  
DURBIN:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      And like my colleague Senator Whitehouse, I don't want my silence to be interpreted as consent to the process that we face before this Senate Judiciary Committee. It is unlike any process I have ever seen.  
      This designation of committee confidential should be put in historic context.  
      There will be an opportunity for us later this afternoon to meet in confidential and secret private session to discuss this nominee. That is not unusual. It is done for virtually every nominee. Some of the meetings literally last a matter of a minute or two and we say, "There's nothing to talk about and we're leaving." But it's happened in the past.  
      But whenever we dealt with committee confidential it was something that was very specific and usually very personal to a nominee. And it was done by bipartisan agreement that we would protect the nominee from assertions or comments that may not have any truth to them whatsoever, but the committee should take into consideration.  
      That is a far cry from what we have faced with this nominee. I cannot understand and I said this in my opening statement here the authority that we have given to a man named Bill Burke, a former assistant to the nominee. That we have said to Mr. Burke, "You you will decide what America gets to see about Brett Kavanaugh. You will make the decision as to which documents we will be allowed to discuss openly and publicly and which documents we cannot."  
      Who is this man? By what authority could he possibly be denying to the American people information about a man who's seeking a lifetime appointment to the highest court in the land?  
      The National Archives is usually the starting point of this process. I put in the record yesterday a statement from the National Archives disavowing this whole process, saying, "This is not the way we've done this in the past. We usually initiate this. Please give us a few weeks to do it in an orderly way."  
      But the decision was made by the White House and the administration not to go down that path, not to take the same course we have on previous nominees, but instead to allow to this gentleman, Bill Burke, a private attorney, the authority to decide what the American people can see about the background of Brett Kavanaugh in other capacities.  
      Who is Bill Burke? All that I know of him is that he was once an assistant to the nominee. I am told that he is not only the attorney for George W. Bush, but also for the White House counsel, Mr. McGahn; Mr. Priebus, the former chief of staff to the president of the United States; and Steve Bannon, a man whom I couldn't characterize in a few words. But he's his personal attorney.  
      And in this situation, he is now the litmus test. He's the filter to decide what the American people will see about this nominee. And that's why we bring this issue before you.  
      Lest you think we are carping on a trifle here, we are talking about whether the American people have the right to know.  
      And we now know that less than 10 percent of the documents reflecting the public career of Mr. Kavanaugh have been made available to this committee.   
      And I just want to say to my colleagues, particularly my colleague from New Jersey, I completely agree with you. I concur with what you are doing and let's jump into this pit together. And I hope my other colleagues will join me.  
      So if there's going to be some retribution against the senator from New Jersey, count me in. I want to be part of this process.  
      I want to understand how Bill Burke, this private attorney, has the right to say, as one of my colleagues mentioned, "This should be considered a classified document; a top secret document, a document that relates to the national security of the United States." By what right, by what authority can Mr. Burke possibly designate a document as committee confidential?  
      He has no authority to do that. He only has authority because he has the consent and the cooperation of the Republican majority on this committee. That is the only thing that brings us to this moment.  
      And let me just say in closing, one last thing.  
      I am sorry that one of my colleagues has characterized all of us on the Democratic side on the first day of this hearing as contemptuous. I have never heard that said before in a full committee meeting, but it's been said.  
      And I'm particularly sorry that he singled out one of our colleagues on this side and accused him of conduct unbecoming a United States senator. I think statements like that are personal, they're disparaging, they question the motive of the colleague, something that we should do our very best to avoid in the United States Senate if we're ever going to restore the reputation of this body.  
CORNYN:  Mr. Chairman 
HIRONO:  Mr. Chairman?  
CORNYN:  may I make just a brief point?  
      Mr. Chairman, I'm looking at a Wall Street Journal article back during the Elena Kagan nomination. It says "Document production from Elena Kagan's years in the Clinton White House Counsel's Office was supervised by Bruce Lindsay, whose White House tenure overlapped with Ms. Kagan."  
      Bill Clinton designated Mr. Lindsay to supervise records from his presidency in cooperation with the National Archives and Records Administration under the Presidential Records Act. So President Bush, by choosing Mr. Burke, is doing exactly what President Clinton did in choosing Bruce Lindsay for that same purpose.  
HIRONO:  Mr. Chairman.   
HIRONO: Count me in too.  
      Mr. Chairman, I too, referred to a so called committee confidential document deemed such by one Bill Burke, and we all know who he is at this point. And had the nominee asked me for a copy of that so-called committee confidential document, I would have been happy to release it to him or give it to him. I am releasing that document to the press and I would defy anyone reading this document to be able to conclude that this should be deemed confidential in any way, shape or form.  
      Thank you.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Mr. Chairman, I now you've mentioned a number of times that I went through the process.  
      I do want to point out, however, that I was also on numerous letters asking for all these documents to be released, and that my colleagues have repeatedly asked for documents to be released.  
      And I go back to what happened on the first morning of this hearing, and that was that we pointed out that when there are 42,000 documents that are dumped on us in one night, there is absolutely no way people are going to be able to adequately review them. And as they review them, they're going to find documents that they want to be made public that they want to ask the nominee about.  
      So the whole point of this is because this hearing was ramrodded through and we were given say, maybe, the month it would take to look at these documents, well, we are we are.  
      So my remedy for this, in addition to making clear that I join my colleagues that we support what Senator Booker is doing here, is that you must somehow expedite the review of every single document and we must have some kind of rules in place to get them out.  
      I understand you'd want to take out Social Security numbers and things like that; that's normal. But we simply can't hide these documents from the American public. It is the highest court of the land.  
KLOBUCHAR:  And I look at I was looking back at everyone was citing people the founders of this country and I found a quote that really works here, by Madison. "A popular government without popular information or the means of acquiring it is but a prologue to a farce or a tragedy," that's what we're talking about here. By ramrodding this through for political reasons, by denying us the access to the documents, we're denying the public the right to see what's out there. And it's just not how we do things in my state and it's not how we've done things in this committee.  
COONS:  Mr. Chairman?  
GRASSLEY:  I'm going to call on Senator Lee and then you. But before that, I a couple of things she just reminded me of in her comments.  
      Number one was to to take care of all the people that didn't act promptly like you did, Senator Klobuchar. That's why we extended it and gave the courtesy of doing whatever anybody else wants wants now. And those are can either be brought up now, those that you've got can be brought up right now to him. And the things that you that aren't clear that you want to bring up with the judge, you can bring up in the closed session today.  
      And the other thing is, when you talk about getting all the documents, I don't know who might work for members of this committee sometime want to be on the Supreme Court. And and, for instance, would you we we didn't ask for all the documents that Kagan had, and e-mails or whatever communications she would've had when she worked with Senator Kennedy. Would you would you want to be exposed to that sort of thing?  
      If if you want everything to be made public or all the e-mails that you have, whether I think they're protected for 50 years for United States senators. So you're talking about the public right to know, you want to give up your e-mails right now, make them public? I don't think you do. Senator Lee.  
LEE:  First of all, Mr. Chairman, I want to say I'm deeply sympathetic to the frustration people feel when they don't have access to documents they want. As a United States senator, I've faced this on a number of occasions.  
      There have been times when we've been called upon to vote on legislation literally at the midnight hour, sometimes much later than that that we haven't seen until moments before it was voted on.  
      There have been other times, and I kid you not, when when I've been asked to vote on a piece of legislation that has an annex to it. And I'm told that I can't see the annex to the legislation because it's classified, and it's classified in a way that I don't have access to because of a committee assignment that I do not have.  
      It's incredibly frustrating. In those circumstances we look for a demon. There are demons in those circumstances, they are too numerous to name here.  
      In this circumstance, there is a demon. But that demon is a law of our own creation; it's called the Presidential Records Act. That's the demon that you're after here. That is the only reason we've got this issue.  
      Now, the custodian of those documents holds and exercises a privilege on behalf of the Bush administration. These are documents we would otherwise not have access to because they are privileged.  
      Pursuant to an agreement with the Senate as an accommodation to the Senate, the custodian of those records has agreed notwithstanding the privileged nature of those documents to hand them over to us with an understanding that when there is a need that arises, with respect to one or more of those documents, to make them public. We can, as a committee, go through a process to do that. That is exactly what has happened. It's what has worked. And it's what has worked here today.  
      So if you're frustrated with the process then let's review the Presidential Records Act. But we're just doing what the law allows us here to do.  
      These documents are not ours, they belong to someone else. It it is not written into the Constitution. It's not written on stone tablets anywhere that we're entitled to documents that don't belong to us.  
      It's significant that William Howard Taft didn't release his presidential papers. It's significant the Robert Jackson, having served as attorney general, didn't release all of the papers he had as attorney general. Why? Well, I assume it had a lot to do with the fact that they didn't belong to us as a Senate.  
      If we want to be able to have a process not just with this administration but in every presidential administration, Democratic, Republican or any other stripe in the future, we need to respect the process and respect the privilege that is accorded to documents that do not belong to us. That's all we're asking. And the process is working, let's move forward.  
FEINSTEIN:  Mr. Chairman?  
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
FEINSTEIN:  On behalf of this side, I I would like to just say a couple of things. There is no process for the committee confidential. It used to be that both sides had to concur, the chair and the ranking member, but now this is this is just simply not the case.  
      To some extent with this kind of thing, committee confidential becomes a kind of a crock; and, it shouldn't. I think we need to sit down. I think we need to have a rule on how committee confidential is determined, on what it means and who makes that decision.  
      For all I know, some Republican staffer could've made the decision. And I I I just don't know. Documents appear; our side had nothing whatsoever to do with the designation of committee confidential. So it becomes a way, if there's no rule, for the majority to essentially put all information through a strainer. Should we let this go out and be public or should we not? And I don't think that's what this committee is about.  
BOOKER:  Mr. Chairman?  
GRASSLEY:  Well, you know you know, in the absence of a majority of of a committee opposed, the Chairman acts on behalf of the committee. And Chairman Leahy accepted documents on a committee confidential basis during Justice Kagan's nomination. And there's no indication that the ranking member agreed to that at that particular time.  
      Senator Coons.  
COONS:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just two quick points, if I could. First, the question has been raised, whose documents are these? These are the American people's documents.  
      The Presidential Records Act gives us a right to obtain them for a Supreme Court nomination after the review of the professionals at the National Archives. And Bill Burke is not a professional at the National Archives. The Archives have said that this is not their process.  
      Equally importantly, because some will now make dire predictions about the appropriateness of the release of any of these documents, Bill Burke himself in his letter to us of August 31 said, and I quote that, Presidential Records Act exemption one, which protects against the disclosure of classified information, did not apply to any documents our team reviewed.  
      I agree with Senator Booker; this confirmation is too important for us to conceal documents that may reveal the nominee's views and I think we shouldn't be proceeding under these grounds.  
BOOKER:  Mr. Mr. Chairman, may I be recognized, sir?  
GRASSLEY:  I hope you don't say the same thing again.  
BOOKER:  Sir, I will not. And first of all, I will say I will say something that I haven't said which is that I appreciate the patience of Job that you're showing here.  
      And I just I want to also, want to say that the representations from Senator Kennedy and Senator Lee were right on point, right on correctly, stood strong last night, challenged me. But they they not only were collegial, but they looked to find a fair way to deal with this process and I want to express my appreciation.  
      I want to clarify something that I said before. There there is no Senate rule that accounts for this process period. This is not a Senate rule. I did not violate a Senate rule.  

BOOKER:  I will pause. I will pause.  
      There there is no Senate rule that that I violated because there's no Senate rule that accounts for this process. And I say to her to to a Chairman that I respect, that I believe has been fair and good to me I I will say that I did willingly violate the Chair's rule on the committee confidential process.  
      I take full responsibility for violating that, sir, and I violated because I I sincerely believe that the public deserves to know this nominee's record, in this particular case, his record on issues of race and the law.  
      And and I could not understand and I violated this rule knowingly, why why these issues should be withheld from the public. Now I appreciate the comments of my colleagues, this is about the closest I'll probably ever have in my life to an "I am Spartacus" moment.  
      My colleagues, numerous of them, said that they too accept the responsibility. There were very serious charges that were made against me by my colleague from Texas. I I don't know if they were political bluster or sincere feelings.  
      If what he said was sincere, there actually are Senate rules governing the behavior of Senators. If he feels that I, and now my fellow colleagues who are with me, have violated those rules, if he's not a tempest in a tea pot, but sincerely believes that, then bring the charges.  
      Go through the Senate process to take on somebody that you said is unbecoming to be a Senator. Let's go through that process because I think the public should understand that at a moment that somebody's up for a lifetime appointment that this issue does the public have a right to know?  
      This is not about the Presidential Records Act, this is not a violation of the Presidential Records Act, not a violation of Senate rules, sir. But if somebody's going to land those charges, I hope that they will follow through with me and Senator Durbin, Senator Coons, Senator Whitehouse, Senator Senator Hirono, Senator Blumenthal, now Senator Feinstein Feinstein.  
      I hope that they will bring charges against us, and I am ready to accept the full responsibility for what I have done, the consequences for what I have done and I stand by the public's right to have access to this document and know this nominee's views on issues that are so profoundly important, like race and the law, torture and other issues.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you.  
CORNYN:  Mr. Mr. Chairman, may I may I may I read the Senate rule 295, the standing rules of the Senate for the benefit of all Senators?  
      Any Senator, officer or employee of the Senate who shall disclose the secret or confidential business or proceedings of the Senate, including the business and proceedings of the committees, subcommittees and Office of the Senate shall be liable, if a Senator, to suffer expulsion from the body and if an officer or employee to dismissal from the service of the Senate and to punishment or contempt.  
      So I would I would correct the Senator's statement there is no rule. There is clearly a rule that applies.  
BOOKER:  If it applies to a rule, bring the charges.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Mr. Chairman? All of us are ready to face that rule on the bogus designation of committee confidential. Just because there is a Senate rule doesn't mean it can be misapplied or misconstrued or misused.  
      And I think even the threat raised by one of my colleagues here is unfortunate, and that is a kind way of putting it, with all due respect. And I would just make one other point. We're dealing here with a lifetime appointment.  
      Nothing we do here is more serious than confirming a Justice on the United States Supreme Court. Let the American people appreciate that we are here in the most solemn responsibility we have under the Constitution. We need the full truth, just as this nominee has sworn to give it to us, we are entitled to it from our colleagues. And the question is what are they concealing by this procedure? What are they afraid the American people will see? What are they afraid we would be asking of this nominee if we had all of those documents that have been denied us in this sham and charade?  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Lee? And then, Senator Tillis.  
LEE:  To Senator Booker's point, the document you're talking about has now been approved through the committee processes. It's been made public, the process worked. And I pledge to work with each and every one of you if you if you've got a document as to which a privilege has been asserted such that it's not public yet, I'll work with you to try to make it public.  
      Let's do it. I I think we can do this, it's not that difficult, we have done it several times, at least three times now. We can do it more. The the privileged thing is real though, and this is not our privilege we're dealing with, this is the privilege that belongs to somebody else.  
      The privileged nature of documents has been around for a long time, since the early days of the republic. The the records, the notes of the Constitutional Convention were ordered sealed for 30 years after the Constitutional Convention that occurred in 1787.  
      I'm not sure of all the reasons why, but those who participated in it decided that that was going to be the rule, sealed 30 years. Those documents didn't belong to anyone else, they belonged to those who attended that convention and participated in it.  
      Now, there were at least two from that list Oliver Ellsworth and James Wilson, I believe, who were subsequently nominated to serve on the United States Supreme Court. No one demanded, to my knowledge, and no one could have gotten notwithstanding the the the 30-year seal agreement, the notes to the Constitutional Convention.  
      Even though those certainly would have been probative as to how those people might have served on the Supreme Court. Yet no one was accusing the United States Senate back then of being a rubber stamp for the Washington administration or anyone else.  
      In fact, in 1795 the United States Senate disapproved of at least one of President Washington's Supreme Court nominees. This was no rubber stamp, and that yet they respected the fact that they didn't own every document, that other people might own them.  
      We don't own these, and so we have to go through the process, a process ordained by a law that we passed and that only we have the power to change. Let's follow that law, we can follow the law and respect the process and respect the rights of each of our colleagues and the rights of the American people to review documents that might be relevant here, but let's go through the appropriate process to do it.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator 
FEINSTEIN:  Mr. Chairman?  
GRASSLEY:  I think I ought to be fair to the Republicans  
FEINSTEIN:  I think you should, too.  
GRASSLEY:  OK, go ahead. Senator Tillis?  
TILLIS:  Thank you Mr. Chair. You know Mr. Chairman, I am I took nearly 17 years to get my college degree. I went to five different institutions, I'm pretty sure none of them have been elevated to the Ivy League.  
TILLIS:  I that's right.  
      I don't ever plan on running for president in 2020 or any point in the future. I want to make I want to make one more comment and then one request. The comment is I hope everybody will record a transcript of what's going on right now.  
      Senator Lee explains things I think in eloquent, legal terms, but let's talk about the consequences of making this an untrusted body to receive documents under the Presidential Records Act. You may rue the day that you do that, because you'll probably get fewer documents in the future.  
TILLIS:  Now what I would like to do is is ask all of our members is perhaps we can actually demonstrate to the American people that we're prepared to expose our own records. I would like to suggest for the purposes of this SCOTUS nomination that all of us waive any right to the speech and debate clause, and that we allow all of our e-mail records related to this SCOTUS nomination, to be made public on an immediate basis.  
      I, for one, am ready to sign up for it now. I hope all of my other members would do the same thing because in the interest of transparency, certainly, it would make sense for every one of us, regardless of what we want to do in the future, to expose that information to the American people.  
GRASSLEY:  Are you done? I'll start with my questioning. By the way, we're going to have to to protect every so everybody gets an opportunity to look at the FBI and anything else you want to ask, at 1 o'clock we're going to have to go into executive session and get that done before if the Senate does close down at 2 o'clock I mean, if they don't give us permission to meet after 2 o'clock. We've got to get that out of the way. So, we'll do that at 1 o'clock.  
FEINSTEIN:  May I just put a document in the record?  
KENNEDY:  Mr. Chairman, would you yield to a question?  
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
      
GRASSLEY:  Yes  
KENNEDY:  Mr. Chairman, would you yield to a question about procedure?  
      
GRASSLEY:  I I used the wrong word, closed. We're talking about 
      
GRASSLEY:  closed instead of executive session, so.  
KENNEDY:  Would you yield to a question about procedure, Mr. Chairman?  
GRASSLEY:  Go ahead.  
KENNEDY:  Can you explain, to me, why we're having to truncate the hearing today?  
GRASSLEY:  Well, I'm not sure we do have to truncate it, but just in case well, it would be because the minority may object to the unanimous consent request the leader would make for this committee to continue to work while the Senate is in session.  
KENNEDY:  Well, let me be sure I understand. Senator Schumer is saying that we have to shut down while the Senate is in session? Do we not, generally, waive that rule?  
GRASSLEY:  Yes, generally it is waived, but if it's objected to, we can't meet. So, that means that we we want to make sure that we get the executive, or the closed session out of the way.  
KENNEDY:  Well, what do may I ask why Senator Schumer is doing that?  
      
GRASSLEY:  I don't know.  
KENNEDY:  We have a nominee to the Supreme Court of the United States. We've all talked about transparency. What is his basis for doing that?  
GRASSLEY:  I you'll have to ask him. I don't know.  
FEINSTEIN:  Mr. if I if I may, I would just like to put a document in the record that the committee was told that President Trump has decided to withhold 102 pages of Kavanaugh's White House Counsel records.  
      
FEINSTEIN:  One hundred and two thousand. What did I say?  
      
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you, 102,000 pages of Kavanaugh's White House Counsel records and asserted a new claim of constitutional privilege. And, of course, that hasn't been done before. I'm told there's no such privilege. There's an executive privilege which is outlined in the Presidential Records Act, and requires the President to notify Congress, and the Archivist, which was not done here. There's a little bit more to it, but I'd just like to put this in the record.  
GRASSLEY:  Without objection 
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  that will be in the record. Yes. Senator or, Judge Kavanaugh, we've heard a lot, yesterday, about your record of independence and impartiality. And you've done more than talk about your independence and impartiality. You've demonstrated judicial values of the bench.  
      By my account, you ruled against executive branch agencies 23 times between May 2006 January 2009. Of course, President Bush was nominated who nominated you to the bench, was the head of the executive branch.  
      You had no problems ruling against the president who appointed you if that's what the law required. And I have no doubt that you'd do the same on the Supreme Court if that's what the law required.  
      You've demonstrated your impartiality. Some of my colleagues tried to depict you as hostile to the little guy, and always willing to rule for the powerful. But your record shows that you rule for the party that has the law on their side.  
      So, that makes you out to be not a pro-plaintiff judge, or pro-defendant judge, but to be a pro-law judge. So, let me ask you about a few of your cases that, I think, demonstrate that you will vindicate the rights of those who are less powerful in our society. After all, our aspirations as Americans is equal 

GRASSLEY:  equal justice under law.  

GRASSLEY:  So, I'll ask you to on each one of them, but just so you know the three cases I'm thinking about is Rossello, Essex Insurance, and United Food and Commercial Workers. So in the first one, the case in which you ruled for the women wrongfully denied Social Security benefits. Tell us your approach to that case.  
KAVANAUGH:  This case this case, Mr. Chairman, was a case in which the Social Security Administration had denied benefits.  

KAVANAUGH:  It was a case where the Social Security Administration had denied benefits to a woman who had a history of mental illness. And they had done so because at one point in time, she had been employed for a brief period of time with a family member, but it had been subsidized.  
      And this was, in my view, the height of arbitrary agency decision making. The case had gone on for 15 years. It was, kind of, a hall of mirrors for the woman. And we wrote an opinion I wrote an opinion reversing the denial of benefits for the woman, and also making clear to the Social Security Administration that any further delay would not be tolerated, and that these kinds of delays in denying benefits to people with mental illness were unacceptable.  
GRASSLEY:  Let's go the Essex Insurance Company case.  


GRASSLEY:  Essex Insurance.  
KAVANAUGH:  In the Essex case, it was a case of a child's family and an insurance company. And the child had been the victim of sexual abuse, and the on three occasions. And the insurance company was trying to give payout, simply, $100,000 for the total number of for the abuse.  
      And the insurance policy said $100,000 for each occurrence, in essence. And we ruled that the insurance company had to pay $100,000 for each occurrence, each incident of the abuse, and therefore, a total of $300,000.  
      So, in that case we ruled, and I wrote for a victim of abuse, against an insurance company that was seeking to squeeze the benefits that were paid under a policy that was owed to the to the plaintiff in the case.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. Then the last one would be United Food and Commercial Workers.  
KAVANAUGH:  And that's a case a union case against Walmart, and the case came from the NLRB and the question was whether Walmart had engaged in unfair labor practices against a union in that case.  
      And in that case we ruled for the union against Walmart in that case on the ground that the factual record supported the conclusion that the company had engaged in unfair labor practices and therefore violated the rights of the union members.  
GRASSLEY:  Now to something that I believe I've discussed with every nominee to the Supreme Court, probably for the last 15 years, it's not about a case or your approach to the law and it's something that Senator Kennedy talked to you about yesterday.  
      It isn't a very popular subject with some of the current and former justices. I think I make Chief Justice Roberts uncomfortable when I raise the issue with him when I speak for a short period of time at the judicial conference.  
      And then there was a former when Justice Souter was on the Supreme Court, he made a famous quip about television cameras, that they'd have to roll over his dead body. I can respect that view, I just think it's plain wrong.  
      I and many of my colleagues on this committee believe that allowing cameras in the federal courthouse would open the courts to the public and bring about a better understanding of the court and its work.  
      You may be aware of that for a number of years I've sponsored a bill, the Sunshine in the Courtroom Act, which gives judges the discretion to allow media coverage of federal court proceedings.  
      Would you keep an open mind on cameras in the courtroom, or if you have strongly held views on it, don't be afraid to tell me.  
KAVANAUGH:  Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your long standing interest in the issue and transparency for the courts of course. I'll tell you what we've done on my court briefly and then tell you some general thoughts going forward if I were to be confirmed.  
      On our court, we've gone from audio release at some date late late much later, then we went to audio release same week, then we went to audio release same day, and now we are allowing audio to go out live with the oral arguments.  
      And that process has been one in which the judges have learned, experienced and become comfortable with the additional transparency that's become in the same time audio over time and and that process has worked well in our court.  
      On the Supreme Court, I think the best approach for me is to listen to the views of people like yourself, Mr. Chairman, and others I know who are interested in that, to learn if I were to be confirmed from the experience there and to see what the experience there is like, to listen to the justices currently on the Supreme Court, as I've said, be part of a team of nine.  
      While I'd want to learn from the other justices what they think about this, because several of them, as you know well, Mr. Chairman, when they are in my seat, expressed support for the idea of cameras for oral arguments and then when they were there for a few years, switched their position after experiencing it.  
      So I'd want to talk to them why why that position. And I as I said to Senator Kennedy last night too, I'd want to think about the difference between oral argument and the the actual announcements of the decisions.  
      I think those are two distinct things, there hasn't been much focus on the possibility of live audio for example of the decision announcements or video of the decision announcements.  
      And I think that's a distinct issue from oral arguments and I'd be interested in in thinking about that and talking to my colleagues if I were to be confirmed. I will have an open mind on it and I do think when you attend oral argument at the Supreme Court, as I have many times, or you attend the announcement of decisions, it is extraordinarily impressive to walk into that building and the majesty of that building the the building itself conveys the stability and majesty of the law.  
      And to go into the courtroom and to see the justices working together, as they do, to try to resolve cases is extraordinarily impressive. It makes you confident, I believe, in the impartial rule of law and in each member of the Supreme Court, to see them in action.  
      And so I do understand your point of view on this and I would certainly keep an open mind on it and listen to you and listen to the other justices on the court of course.  
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm going to go back to Roe, because most of us look at you as the deciding vote. And I asked yesterday if your views on Roe have changed since you were in the White House.  
      You said something to the effect that you didn't know what I meant. And we have an e-mail that was previously marked confidential but is now public and shows that you asked about making edits to an op-ed that read the following, and I quote, "first of all it is widely understood, accepted by legal scholars across the board, that Roe v. Wade and its progeny are the settled law of the land", end quote.  
      You responded by saying, and I quote, "I'm not sure that all legal scholars refer to Roe as a settled law of the land at the Supreme Court level, since court can always overrule its precedent. And three current justices on the court would do so."  
      This has been viewed as you saying that you don't think Roe is settled. I recognize the words said is what legal scholars refer to, so please, once again, tell us why you believe Roe is settled law and if you could, do you believe it is correctly settled?  
KAVANAUGH:  So thank you, Senator Feinstein, in that draft letter, it was referring to the views of legal scholars and I think I I think my comment in the e-mail was that might be overstating the position of legal scholars and so it wasn't a technically accurate description in the letter of what legal scholars thought.  
      At that time, I believe, Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice Scalia were still on the court at that time. But the the broader points was simply that I think it was overstating something about legal scholars.  
      And I'm always concerned with accuracy and I thought that was not quite accurate description of legal all legal scholars, because it referred to all. To your point, your broader point, Roe v. Wade is an important precedent of the Supreme Court.  
      It's been reaffirmed many times. It was reaffirmed in Planned Parenthood versus Casey in 1992 when the court specifically considered whether to reaffirm it or whether to overturn it.  
      In that case, in great detail, the three justice opinion of Justice Kennedy, Justice Souter and Justice O'Connor went through all the factors, the stare decisis factors, analyze those and decided to reaffirm Roe.  
KAVANAUGH:  That makes Casey precedent on precedent. It's been relied on. Casey itself has been sighted as authority in subsequent cases such as Glucksberg and other cases. So the precedent on precedent is quite important as you think about stare decisis in this context.  
      A similar analogy, the United States v. Dickerson case in 2000 where the court considered whether to overturn Miranda v. Arizona or to reaffirm in. And in that case, the court, through Chief Justice Rehnquist, specifically reaffirmed Miranda despite the fact that Chief Justice Rehnquist had been a critic of Miranda in his early days and written some opinions quite critical of it.  
      It became that so that Dickerson case is similarly precedent on precedent, which is important going forward as you think about the stare decisis calculation for a case like Miranda.  
      So that's why both of those cases, Planned Parenthood v. Casey and Dickerson, are cases where I would refer to them as precedent on precedent.  
FEINSTEIN:  So you believe it's correctly settled, but is it correct law in your view?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, there's on that case or on Dickerson or on cases like Citizen United or Heller or United States v. Lopez or Kelo, just the whole body of modern Supreme Court case law, I have to follow what the nominees who've been in this seat before have done.  
FEINSTEIN:  Judge, a yes or a no will do.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I'm just if I can briefly explain 
FEINSTEIN:  Yes, you can.  
KAVANAUGH:  Briefly. I'll try to be brief, but this when you're in this seat, I'm not just sitting here for myself. I'm sitting here as a representative of the judiciary and the obligation to preserve the independence of the judiciary, which I know you care deeply about.  
      And so, one of the things I've done is studied very carefully what nominees have done in the past, what I've referred to as nominee precedent, and Justice Ginsburg, but really all the justices have not given hints or forecasts or previews. And Justice Kagan, I think, captured it well, as she often does, with talking about question like the one you're asking.  
      You can't give a thumbs up or thumbs down and maintain the independence of the judiciary. So I need to follow that nominee precedent here.  
LEE:  Mr. Chairman, could I ask that the e-mail at issue be made part of the record?  
FEINSTEIN:  Pardon me?  
LEE:  I'd like to ask that the e-mail at issue be made part of the record.  
FEINSTEIN:  Yes, would be happy to do that. Thank you.  
      During your time in the Bush White House, the administration actively took steps to limit women's reproductive choices. This included re-imposing the global gag rule to prevent foreign organizations from spending their own money on reproductive health and trying to prevent the FDA from making Plan-B contraception available over the counter.  
      During your service at the White House, 201 2001 to 2006, did you work on any issues related to women's reproductive health or choice?  
KAVANAUGH:  There President Bush was a pro-life president. And so, his policy was pro-life, and those who worked for him, therefore, had to assist him, of course, in pursuing those policies whether they were regulatory. There was partial birth legislation that was passed as well.  
      And some of those thing might have crossed my desk. I can't remember specifics, but he I think this came up in Justice Kagan's when she worked for President Clinton. He was had a different view than President Bush on that issue, and she had some work for President Clinton.  
      I consider myself working for President Bush, was there to assist him.  
FEINSTEIN:  Let me go to torture. During the time you worked in the White House, the Office of Legal Counsel concluded that harsh interrogation techniques were legal, even though Congress had passed a law in '94 banning torture.  
      The Office of Legal Counsel took a sweeping view of presidential power and concluded that the president could override the statute. In response in 2005, the Congress adopted an amendment championed by our colleague, Senator McCain I was the co-sponsor that stated that only interrogation techniques that can be used are those authorized in the Army Field Manual.  
      Was the Office of Legal Counsel correct when it concluded that the president could ignore the torture ban?  
KAVANAUGH:  All right, so the Office of Legal Counsel, Senator, subsequently withdrew those memos, as you know. And as I've made clear in some of my writings, the review of Judge David Baron's books, some of my opinions as well, the president does not have the authority to disregard statutes passed by Congress regulating the war effort except in certain, very narrowly describe circumstances that are historically rooted; the common example being command of troops in battle.  
      So as a general proposition, the president has to comply with the law. The president is subject to the law including in the national security context. That is the lesson I think of the Youngstown Steel case of Justice Jackson's categories.  
      Category three as I've said repeatedly in my writings, which is where Congress has prohibited the president from doing something, is critically important. That's essential to the rule of law as Justice Jackson said. That's the equilibrium of the country is at stake in category three, and I've written about that quite frequently.  
FEINSTEIN:  Got it. Thank you. Today we have a president who said he could authorize worse than water-boarding. How would you feel about that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I'm not going to comment on and I don't think I can, sitting here, on current 
FEINSTEIN:  Well, but you know what the law is. You've made that clear.  
KAVANAUGH:  I know what the law is, Senator, and I know you're 
FEINSTEIN:  Well, I asked specifically how do you feel about that?  
KAVANAUGH:  I feel that I should follow the law as a judge. I know the what the law is and I know your leadership on this issue both with the report you did, which was the thorough documentation of things that happened as well as recommendations for the future. And I know your leadership with Senator McCain on the 2005 act as well.  
      And I know what the law is and I've written about the how the separation of powers works when Congress passes laws of the kind that you have.  
FEINSTEIN:  One on last question on this. In December of '05, President Bush issued a signing statement regarding the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 reserving the president's right to disregard that the law's ban on torture disregard the law's ban on torture if it interfered with his constitutional authorities as president.  
      What was your involvement, if any, with this signing statement?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I was staff secretary. Any issue that reached the president's desk with the exception of a few covert matters would have crossed my desk on the way to the president's desk. I wouldn't have, in the ordinary course, provided the policy advice or the legal advice, but it would have crossed my desk.  
KAVANAUGH:  So in that case, the signing statement, the drafts of it, that process would have crossed my desk at some point.  
FEINSTEIN:  OK. In a 2013 panel discussion, as well, you did you did nothing about it, though. It crossed your desk and that was that.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, there was a there was debate, as I think I've mentioned, about that. The Counsel to the President, Ms. Miers at the time, was the ultimate adviser on that matter for the president and thus would have been the one who primarily dealt with that with the president.  
      It was important as in that the job I had there not to supplant the policy or legal advisers. That was not my job. My job was to make sure the president had the benefit of the views of his policy and legal advisers.  
FEINSTEIN:  One more Bush-era question on this. In a 2000 panel discussion at NYU Law School regarding Bush administration anti-terrorism policies, you said the Bush administration went, quote, "right up to that legal line to defend the security of the United States," end quote, implying that Bush policies did not cross the legal line. Do you mean to suggest that Bush administration's post-9/11 programs, including the CIA Torture Program, were legal?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, Senator, that's not what I was suggesting there, and let me try to 
FEINSTEIN:  Please.  
KAVANAUGH:  Provide you an explanation. President's Bush's view, as I think he has said publicly, was in trying to keep America safe, he was going to do everything he could within the law. He relied on his lawyers to provide him the boundaries of what the law is and then he would go up to that line as he thought effective as a matter of policy.  
      It was up to the lawyers, therefore, to make sure that they were giving sound advice and not and having the backbone and this is something that your legislation reinforces. Lawyers need to have backbone, even in pressurized moments, to say no, and I've talked about that many times.  
      One of the most important responsibilities of an executive branch lawyer in the passions of the moment, where the pressure's on, where the president wants to do something perhaps, is to go into the Oval Office and say "No, you shouldn't do this."  
      And that's something that I've written about, talked about, and experienced in my time with President Bush, and I've encouraged young lawyers to have that backbone and fortitude to say no. That's about the most important thing 
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you. A quick change of subject. You sat on a case where a trainer, Dawn Brancheau, was killed while interacting with a killer whale during a live performance. Following her death, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration found that SeaWorld had violated workforce safety laws. The majority agreed with the agency that SeaWorld had violated the law.  
      According to what I know, you disagree. In your dissent, you argue that the agency lacked the authority to regulate employers to protect participants in sporting events or entertainment shows. However, the statute as enacted applies to each employer, and it defined employer as anyone engaged in business affecting commerce who has employees.  
      Where in the text of the law did Congress exempt employers of animal trainers?  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you for the question, Senator. The the first point I want to make is that was not a case that involved potential compensation of the family. That was handled through the state tort system, or through insurance, or through a settlement with the SeaWorld and the family. So the case before us had nothing to do with compensation of the family, it had to do with the separate regulation of SeaWorld.  
      The issue, Senator, was precedent. I follow as a judge, I follow precedent. The precedent of the Labor Department, as I read it, was that the Labor Department, under that statute, would not regulate what it called the intrinsic qualities of a sports or entertainment show.  
      So lots of sports and entertainment shows have serious dangers, whether it's football or the the balance beam in gymnastics or the high wire act at the circus or the lion tamer show, and the SeaWorld show was of as I saw it, of a piece under those with that precedent that said the Labor Department would not regulate, for example, whether baseball helmets had to have ear flaps, or whether to prohibit the punt return or to make the balance beam have nets.  
      And this seemed to be covered by that precedent, as I saw it. The Labor Department in the oral arguments tried to distinguish, for example, the dangers of football from the dangers of the SeaWorld show, and I did not, as I explained in the opinion, find that distinction persuasive, but I did make clear two things, Senator. One is Congress could of course regulate the intrinsic Congress could make the decision to regulate the intrinsic qualities of sports and entertainment shows, or the Labor Department could change its precedent.  
      And I made clear that of course state tort law as the NFL has experienced with the concussion issue state tort law always exists as a way to ensure or help ensure safety in things like the SeaWorld show.  
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you. A question, if I may, about independent agencies. Congress has established several independent agencies. We believe they're essential to enforcing our laws and safeguarding consumers. Congress requires the president to have good cause to remove the heads of these agencies to insulate them from political interference.  
      You have objected to this limit on the president's power and struck down for the the for-cause requirement in a case involving the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The D.C. Circuit disagreed and overturned your decision. If the president can fire the heads of independent agencies for any reason, what's to prevent political interference in these independent agencies?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I have followed the Humphrey's Executor precedent. I have referred to it as entrenched. That is the precedent that allows independent agencies and protects them from at-will firing, the for cause restriction. So as a general matter, I have affirmed the or, I've followed the precedent of Humphrey's Executor.  
      The example you're talking about, the Congress established a new independent agency that did not follow the traditional model of independent agencies 
FEINSTEIN:  Yes.  
KAVANAUGH:  Of having multiple members. That's all I thought was a problematic there, and I did not invalidate or did not say the agency should stop operating. I said the agency can continue performing its important functions on behalf of consumers, but either it had to be restructured as a multi-member agency or the president had to be able to remove the single head at-will.  
FEINSTEIN:  The limited set of documents we've received indicates that you were heavily involved in the Bush White House's response to congressional investigations after the Enron scandal. Is that accurate?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is accurate. We had a document request from Senator Lieberman's committee, and I was one of the lawyers that had to help gather the documents from people within the White House and then had to negotiate documents. I had to negotiate documents with Senator Lieberman's staff.  
FEINSTEIN:  Right. So you know that Enron was one of the greatest corporate scandals in American history, and I can tell you as a senator from California, not only did many of my constituents lose everything financially when Enron collapsed under the weight of its accounting fraud but the fraud and market manipulation contributed to an energy crisis in California.  
      White House e-mails show that you were asked to review a set of draft talking points for press secretary Ari Fleischer that addressed the role of Enron's market manipulation in the California energy crisis.  
      Essentially the talking point said if there was any is conduct by Enron it was up to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to investigate and punish the company. I'm not going to ask you if you remember the specific document, but was that your view that FERC was the regulatory body that was supposed to stop this sort of misconduct?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm not recalling the specifics of that, Senator. My role as a general matter was to help gather documents in response to Senator Lieberman's committee's requests, as I recall. And I know FERC would have a role, necessarily, in something like that, but I don't know if I thought primary-I don't think that was my area of expertise so I'm just not recalling it specifically, Senator.  

FEINSTEIN:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Hatch.  
HATCH:  Well, thank you Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the way you've conducted these hearings in spite of these type of irresponsible outbursts and so forth that's hard to believe.  
      Judge Kavanaugh, I'd first like to commend you for how you conducted yourself these last two days. You have displayed the levelheadedness and decency that so many of your friends tell us actually exist. I would say your friends and former colleagues have described in their letters to this committee. I wish I could say the same about everyone who's attended this hearing or conveyed it or covered it on social media, but I can't.  
      I'm deeply concerned about the theatrics we've seen these last two days. I've been on this committee for 42 years-longer than any other person except Senator Leahy. I'm the former Chairman. Never have I seen the constant interruptions we witnessed at this hearing.  
      Confirmation hearings are supposed to be an opportunity for the American people to hear from the nominee. Unfortunately it seems that some of the political left have decided to try to turn this hearing into a circus. Now I worry about the precedent this is setting for future confirmations, but that's not the worst.  
      The worst of it are the attacks against people who aren't even up for confirmation, who just happen to be here in the room to support the nominee. It's bad enough that Supreme Court nominations have turned into all-out war against the nominee. Have we really reached a point where anyone who supports or even sits behind a nominee must also be destroyed?  
      Has our tribalism really reached that low? To those who have been unfairly caught up in the mob mentality of the last two days I just want to say, you're right to be here, supporting someone you believe in. Don't let the fact that there are a lot of frankly sick people out there cause you to lose faith in our political process.  
      We need good, decent people to step forward to contribute even when it's ugly, particularly when it's ugly.  
      Just now to my questions. Let me ask you this:  as I did yesterday, I'd like to ask you to keep your answers to my questions concise, so we can get through this many of them as we can.  
      Late last night one of my colleagues asked you a series of open-ended questions about any conversations you have had with anyone at a 350-person law firm about special counsel Bob Mueller or his investigation. You said you did not remember having had any such conversations. My colleague did not clarify why my colleague was asking the questions and did not allow you to complete your answers. I want to give you a chance to respond if you'd like to.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I don't recall any conversations of that kind with anyone at that law firm. I didn't know everyone who might work at that law firm, but I don't recall any conversations of that kind. I haven't had any inappropriate conversations about that investigation with anyone. I've never given anyone any hints, forecasts, previews, winks, nothing about my view as a judge or how I would rule as a judge on that or anything related to that, so I thank you for the opportunity to clarify and reassure you on that.  
HATCH:  Well, thank you. With all of the accusations and insinuations and innuendo being hurled around yesterday there's something I have to come clean about. I'm on the board of visitors to the Federalist Society. It's true. For those who are not familiar with the Federalist Society it generally holds debates and puts together panels on legal issues covering all sides of these issues:  the liberal, the conservative et cetera. It's a very responsible organization.  
      The American Constitution Society, the Democrat organization, does much the same thing. I respect them; except it focuses on liberal or progressive lawyers. So this is familiar to my Democratic colleagues on this committee.  
      They've been involved with ACS with the ACS from keynoting the annual conference to being an honorary host committee chair, to speaking on panels, to writing blog entries for the organization. I even heard a nasty rumor that one of them spoke at a Federalist Society event. Can you believe that?  
      You've already said that when he came to your nomination you spoke with the president, the vice president and the White House Counsel Don McGahn, not the Federalist Society. So I don't need to ask you about that. My question for use this:  what has your experience with the Federalist Society been?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, thank you. The Federalist Society, as you note, provides holds debates at law schools.  
HATCH:  On both sides.  
KAVANAUGH:  On both sides. The typical program of a Federalist Society event at a law school will have two speakers and a moderator; that's typical, with the two speakers presenting different views on an issue.  
      It could be for example Fourth Amendment privacy where you have someone who's got different view on national-security related Fourth Amendment issues or on free speech issues or all sorts of legal issues. They try to have debates where both sides are presented at the law school events that I've been to.  
      At the conventions they'll always have panels of four or five with a moderator where we'll have a spectrum of views represented on a different topic. They're very enriching in terms of your knowledge of the law and they're also enriching, I believe, in terms of providing different perspectives on the law and they have they welcome people and actually insist on having people from all different perspectives at the events so it is very beneficial to the law.  
KAVANAUGH:  I think the programs they have at the law schools, they're very educational. They provide some of the best debates that are held at the law schools I believe.  
      So I think the organization, which itself does not lobby and does not file amicus briefs or anything like that, does a very valuable service at law schools and the legal community as a whole for bringing together different views on important legal issues, and I I applaud them for their efforts to bring speakers to campus and provide legal debates on campus and in lawyers conventions.  
HATCH:  You've described it quite well. Earlier this year, I attended oral argument in Microsoft v. United States, also known as the Microsoft Ireland case. Naturally, I was very interested in that.  
      At issue in the case was the meaning of the Stored Communications Act and whether a warrant for data store overseas but accessible in the United States falls within the Act's confines. I had introduced legislation known as the CLOUD Act to resolve this issue. Following oral argument, Congress passed the CLOUD Act, thus mooting the case before the court.  
      Now, the specific question at issue in the Microsoft Ireland case has been resolved by my legislation, but the case also raised a broader question that I'd like to ask you. When the Stored Communications Act was passed in 1986, no one imagined a world where data could be stored overseas but accessible instantaneously in the United States. It was clear that the Act covered data stored in the United States, but it was less clear that it extended to data stored abroad using new technologies that were not available in 1986.  
      How do we interpret our laws in light of changing technology? How do we determine whether the authors and enactors of legislation would have intended the legislation to cover new technologies and unforeseen situations?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I think there as elsewhere the job of a judge is to focus on the words written in the statute passed by Congress. Sometimes Congress will write a statute where the words are very precise and it's quite clear; it covers only something that might be in existence at the time.  
      Sometime Congress will write broader, more capacious words as does the Constitution at times that can apply to new technologies. For example, the Fourth Amendment, of course, in the Constitution applies to things that were not known at the founding, including cars and communication devices that were not known at the founding. So, too, with statutes; it depends on how broadly or narrowly you've you've written it.  
      And your question raises a broader point, which is the issue of privacy and liberty on the one hand versus security, law enforcement on the other is an enormous issue going forward for the Congress in the first instance I believe, and also for the federal courts, including the Supreme Court going forward. The Carpenter case this past term is a good example of that written by Chief Justice Roberts.  
      As I look ahead over the next 10 to 20 years, that balance of Fourth Amendment liberty and privacy versus security and law enforcement is an enormous issue.  
HATCH:  Well, I appreciate your elucidation on that. On the domestic front, there's been debate for some time now in Congress about whether our laws should should be should be updated to require a warrant for the content of electronic communications regardless of how old those communications are.  
      As you may know, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act currently distinguishes between communications that are less than 180 days old and those that are more than 180 days old requiring a warrant for the former but not the latter.  
      Can you speak generally to the importance of warrant requirements and why they're an important bulwark against the government overreach?  
KAVANAUGH:  The warrant requirement helps ensure, as a general matter, that the Executive Branch is not unilaterally able to invade someone's privacy and someone's liberty without judicial oversight that ensures that there's probable cause or whatever the standard might be in a statutory situation to get someone's records or information or otherwise invade their liberty or privacy.  
      So that judicial oversight's part of the checks and balances of the Constitution, and Congress has written that also into several statues as you know, Senator.  
HATCH:  Well, I I want to return to the e-mail Senator Feinstein was asking you about. You were asked for your comments on an op-ed that was going to be published by a group of pro-choice women in support of a circuit court nominee. You said, quote, "I am not sure that all legal scholars refer to Roe as the settled law of the land at the Supreme Court level since court can always overrule its precedent," unquote. You then added, quote, "the point there is in the inferior court point," unquote.  
      Were you giving your opinion on Roe there or were you talking about what law scholars might say?  
KAVANAUGH:  I was talking about what legal scholars might say, and I thought the op-ed should be accurate about what in describing legal scholars.  
HATCH:  OK, so we got that cleared up.  
      You've been critical of the practice of judges sentencing defendants based on uncharged or acquitted conduct. With regard to acquitted conduct in particular, I agree that the notion that a judge can sentence a defendant to a long prison term for a crime that a jury acquitted the defendant of flies in the face of the right to a jury trial. You've written that you believe, quote, "it likely will take some combination of Congress and the sentencing commission to systematically change federal sentencing to preclude use of an acquitted or uncharged conduct," unquote.  
      Why do you take issue with the use of acquitted conduct at sentencing and why do you believe this is an issue that will likely require intervention by Congress to resolve?  
KAVANAUGH:  The opinions I've written on this and I've written several say, in essence, the following, Senator. When a criminal defendant, for example, let's say, is charged with 10 10 counts, let's suppose, and is acquitted on nine and convicted on one, and then the criminal defendant is sentenced as if he or she had been convicted of all 10 because the judge just says, "well, I think, you know, you did X, or that Y, and under my discretion which you now have under the Supreme Court's case law for sentencing, I'm just going to sentence you the same anyway."  
      Defendants and the public the families of the defendants understandably say that seems unfair I thought the point of the jury trial was to determine whether I was guilty or not guilty on all those charges, and if I'm getting sentenced exactly exactly as if I were guilty on all the charges, that seems a violation of due process.  
KAVANAUGH:  So I've written about the fairness and perceived fairness of the use of acquitted conduct at sentencing. I've Judge Millett on my court and I have both written about it several times and made clear our concern about the use of acquitted conduct and how it affects the sentencing system.  
      Why I've said Congress might need to look at it, although I've also pointed out, individual district judges can can look at it, is because under the current system, sentencing judges have wide discretion in picking sentences.  
      So, it's hard for a appeals court to say that you've infringed your discretion, given some of the case law of the Supreme Court which grants that discretion. But I don't like the practice, and I've made that clear in my opinion. So, I'm just repeating my opinions here because of the unfairness and perceived unfairness of it.  
HATCH:  OK. This committee has been chasing an elusive deal on criminal justice reform for quite some time now. One particular focus of mine, in this area, has been mens rea reform. Without adequate mens rea protections, that it without the requirement that a person know his conduct was wrong, or unlawful everyday citizens can be held criminally liable for a conduct that no reasonable person would know was wrong.  
      Critics of my legislative efforts to bring clarity to mens rea requirements claimed the effort is a ploy to get corporations and white collar defendants off the hook. But stronger mens rea requirements protect the liberty of all defendants in the criminal justice system, the vast majority of whom are not corporations, or white collar defendants.  
      You've written about the importance of mens rea requirements, including in cases involving unsympathetic defendants like an armed robber, or a convicted murderer. Why, in your view, are mens rea requirements so important?  
KAVANAUGH:  Mens rea requirements are important, but because, Senator, under the Due Process Clause and the precedents of the Supreme Court, it is not right to convict someone based on a fact they did not know. It's just an elemental point of due process.  
      Justice Jackson described this principle in his famous Morissette decision that he wrote. It's as elementary as the he said, as the school child's, I didn't mean to, I didn't know. And if it someone, truly, didn't know a fact that they that's relevant to their conviction to, nonetheless, convict them, is contrary to due process.  
      I've seen cases where a mandatory minimum sentence was elevated from 10 years to 30 years. A 30 year mandatory minimum based on a fact that the defendant did not know. I dissented in that case, and in that case joined by Judge Tatel who is an appointee of President Clinton to our court.  
      Saying that and I wrote a very lengthy dissent about the history of mens rea, and just how much of a violation of due process I thought had occurred in that case. That was not a a sympathetic defendant, given what he had been convicted of.  
      But I thought it was a complete violation of due process, and principles of mens rea, that were longstanding from Morissette, to give him a 30 year mandatory minimum for a fact he did not know.  
      I have also wrote joined an opinion, and wrote a separate opinion, reversing a murder conviction of someone who where the jury instructions were unclear about the mental state of the of the murderer. It was a question of manslaughter versus second degree murder.  
      That would've had a huge difference in the defendant's sentence. And I wrote an opinion saying, this was not an especially sympathetic case, given the facts. But the jury instructions were flawed on the issue of the mental state. And my exact line was, "I'm unwilling to sweep that under the rug." And that's how I felt about the that case.  
      There was a dissent in that case, but I was in the majority reversing the murder conviction in that case. No matter who you are in my court, if you if you have the right argument on the law, I'm going to rule in your favor. And mens rea is foundational to due process. I've written that repeatedly. And I share your concern about mens rea reform, Senator Hatch.  
HATCH:  Well, thank you. I'd I have one last question. Some people seem to think that religious people should not work in government because they swear allegiance to their church, no their country, necessarily. I have, faithfully, served in this country for over 40 years and I'm a I believe I'm a religious person.  
      Now, religion is also a big part of your life. You went to Catholic school. Your children go to Catholic school. And you regularly attend church, and serve a church supported a church supported soup kitchen. I know that religious faith is a personal subject, but I'd like to hear from you how you how your private beliefs affect your public decisions. Can you be devout in your faith and still uphold the law?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, my religious beliefs have no relevance to my judging. I judge based on the Constitution and laws of the United States. I take an oath to do that. For 12 years I've lived up to that oath.  
      At the same time, of course, as you point out, I am I've I am religious, and I am a Catholic, and I grew up attending Catholic schools. And the Constitution of the United States foresaw that religious people, or people who are not religious, are all equally American.  
      As I've said in one of my opinions, the Newdow opinion, no matter what religion you are, or no religion at all, we're all equally American. And the Constitution of the United States also says, in Article VI, no religious tests shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States.  
      That was an important provision to have in the founding Constitution to ensure that there was not discrimination against people who had a religion, or people who didn't have a religion. It's a foundation of our country. We're all equally American.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator 
HATCH:  Well, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Leahy.  
LEAHY:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And as I mentioned to you earlier, I have a number of letters and ask consent to be placed in the record, as well as the e-mails that were declassified, I think some at 3 o'clock this morning. That they be placed in the record.  
GRASSLEY:  Without objection and so ordered.  
LEAHY:  Thank you. And I know I know there was claim, this morning, the committee was following my precedent Judge Kavanaugh, not so. For Justice Kagan, we had 99 percent of her documents from her time at the White House. And, of course, we do not have we have less than 10 percent of yours.  
      And there were 860 documents designated as committee confidential by the nonpartisan National Archives that was discussed with, both, the Democrats and the Republicans on the committee. Nobody objected to that. But let's go to follow up on our questions yesterday.  
      We discussed the fact that while you worked on nominations in the Bush White House, you received stolen material from a Republican Senate staffer named Manny Miranda.  
      I thought it was a digital Watergate. He stole 4670 computer files from six Democratic senators. And he was doing this in effort to confirm some of President George W. Bush's most controversial judicial nominees. They were some of the most contentious fights of the day, and this Republican stole 4,670 computer files.  
      In 2004 and 2006 you testified, and a number of senators, both Republicans and Democrats asked you, and you said you had never received any stolen materials. That doesn't appear to be accurate. You also testify that you knew nothing about the scandal until it was public, and if you had suspected anything untoward you would have reported it.  
      You also testified to Senator Hatch that you'd never received any document, even appeared to you to have been drafted or prepared by Democratic staff.   
      I also asked you yesterday whether Mr. Miranda asked to meet privately offsite to hand you documents related to Senators Biden and Feinstein. I also asked about him sending you, quote, "intel" with extraordinary detail to specifics about what I was going to ask a highly controversial nominee just days later, something I'd never said publicly.  
      I also asked about you receiving a draft, a non-public letter of mine, before any mention it was made public. You testified you didn't recall anything specific, but you thought that sharing information between staff was common.  
      So let me ask you this has anyone told you what any Democratic senators have been advised to do by our staff at this hearing?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think there's been a lot of 

KAVANAUGH:  There's been a lot of discussion about what individual senators might be interested in, and when I met 

LEAHY:  I really want to hear what you have to say, judge, not what protesters have to say. Please go ahead. Have you been advised have you been told what any Democratic senators have been advised to do by our staff at this hearing?  
KAVANAUGH:  Right, so when I met individually with 20 the 65 senators, including almost every member of the Committee, a lot of the senators, a lot of you in the meetings told me issues you were interested in. I think your staff was probably talking to 
LEAHY:  Has anybody said to you, for example, Senator Leahy's staff is asking him to do this at the hearing tomorrow?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I think you, yourself, what you were going to ask. So I 
LEAHY:  No, I tried to give you a good heads up, and I appreciate the meeting, but has anybody else told you this is what Leahy's staff is asking him to ask at the hearing tomorrow?  
KAVANAUGH:  Again, I think this might be a different kind of process because you all were very transparent when I met with you. I'm looking around and saying, "here's what I'm focused on and here's what I'm going to ask you at the hearings," and it's turn out you were telling you were accurately telling me that your concerns for 
LEAHY:  And you're saying that's normal.  
KAVANAUGH:  That 
LEAHY:  But did anybody hand you anything marked "highly confidential" 
KAVANAUGH:  For this 
LEAHY:  about any one of these senators?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, I'm not remembering anything like that, but you all did talk about the issues. In other words, there were no surprises. Well, there are not no surprises, but there are you know, you gave me basic concerns and issues you raised 
LEAHY:  I want to make sure we're clear on this. Nobody handed you something marked "highly confidential", but that is the material you received from Manny Miranda. For example, on July 18, 2002, days before an extremely controversial hearing for this circuit nominee, Priscilla Owen, Mr. Miranda sent you an email with the subject line "highly confidential." Informed you that Senator Biden's staff was asking him not to attend the meeting that day.  
      On March 18, Mr. 2003, Mr. Miranda sent you several pages of talking points that were stolen verbatim stolen verbatim for Democratic files. The talking points revealed arguments Democrats were making on another controversial nominee, Miguel Estrada. The subject like of the email stated it was not for distribution, meaning Mr. Miranda was asking you not to share the information. This has now been, as of 3 o'clock this morning, made public.  
      So yesterday when I asked you about these specific events, you said you didn't have any recollection. So I'm not going to ask if you remember receiving this email, I'm going to ask you this. Why would you ever be asked to keep secret Democratic talking points if they were legitimately obtained?  
KAVANAUGH:  I am looking at these, Senator, and it says, for example, it looks like that Biden's staff is asking him not to attend the hearing. I don't know why that 
LEAHY:  But look how you received it.  
KAVANAUGH:  I know, highly I don't know why that's even confidential because 
LEAHY:  Whether it is or not, would you consider that somewhat unusual to be receiving from Republican staff member something marked highly confidential, telling what he's found out the Democrat's going to do?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, as I explained yesterday, Senator, my understanding of this process is that the staffs do talk with one another, that they're not camps with no communication. And that was my experience when I worked in the White House.  
      And so, this it looks like Biden's staff is asking him not to attend the hearing would have been pretty standard kind of information that would be 
LEAHY:  Well, not really. You read this. I would be amazed if somebody handed me a memo saying this is a confidential memo Senator Grassley's staff has prepared for him. And no, I would not read it. I'd be on the phone immediately to Senator Grassley saying I'm bringing something over that just arrived to me. Would you take a look at it.  
      But you received on July 28, 2002, and email from Manny Miranda that said, "my staff distributed a confidential letter to Democratic counsels, not to Republicans." Mr. Miranda said, "I received that letter in the strictest confidence."   
      You were asked explicitly by Mr. Miranda to take no action on the email without his his further instructions. You never asked him how he obtained the letter sent in strict confidence to me.  
      And then July 30, 2002, you received an email from Miranda saying they had on 100 percent info that I was going to be in a meeting about a controversial nominee. And then further on August 13, 2002, emailing obviously taken from my internal emails what I was going to do.  
      Did any of this raise a red flag in your mind?  
KAVANAUGH:  It did not, Senator, because it all seemed consistent with the usual kinds of discussions that happen. And sometimes people do say things of here's what my boss is thinking, but don't share it around. I mean I must've had so many conversations in the course of my life like that where someone's saying like that about something. In other words, trying to give you a heads up on something. And that just seems standard Senate staff. So the direct answer to your question is for example Biden it looks like Biden's staff is asking him not to attend the hearing. That wouldn't have raised anything at all for me other than 
LEAHY:  Not even where it came from? On June 5, 2003 you received an email from a Republican Senate staffer with a subject line:  "spying." That is not overly subtle. This staffer appears in over 1,000 documents we received together with both of you and Mr. Miranda. She says she has a mole for us and so forth. None of this raised a red flag with you?  
KAVANAUGH:  It did not, Senator. Again, people have friends across the aisle who they talk to at least this was my experience back then; maybe it's changed. And there was a lot of bipartisanship on the committee. There was a lot of bipartisanship among the staffs. There were a lot of friendships and relationships where people would talk to oh, I've got a friend on Senator Kennedy's, Ted Kennedy staff, or I have a friend on Senator Hatch's staff or I have a friend on Senator Specter's staff. That kind of conversation and information sharing was common. So did it not raise red flags.  
LEAHY:  Judge, I was born at night, but not last night. And if I had something that somebody sent we've stolen this, or don't tell anybody we have this, I think it would raise some red flags.   
      Now we only have a fraction of your record and I do thank the Chairman for opening fees up at three this morning. But as you know, the president has asserted executive privilege the first time we've had to face this up here on a nominee from either Republicans or Democrats.  
      Of 102,000 pages of material 102,000 from just your time in the White House. That includes a lot on judicial nominations. Can you confirm for me today that in that 102,000 pages that there are no emails from Mr. Miranda marked highly confidential or do not share or take no action on this, describing what he has found out the Democrats are thinking?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I am not involved in the documents process, so I don't know what's in them.  
LEAHY:  Well, that is convenient. But we don't know what's in them either because we've never had so much withheld before. We don't know what's in all of the documents. They're still being gone through by the archives because this is being rushed through. We don't get a chance to see them.   
      That's not fair to us and frankly, Judge, it's not fair to you. You've probably been told you have the votes to be confirmed so you don't have to care but I care. I care about the integrity of the Supreme Court. I care about who's on there. I think you should care of what's in that just as we should care what's in it.  
      There are even more documents than I had time to discuss today. I find it impossible to reconcile what we're regularly being told that your testimony that you received nothing stolen, had no reason to suspect anything was stolen when frankly as we now know Republican staffer Manny Miranda stole things and some of the things he stole went directly to you.  
      Let me ask you another one. You testified in 2004 that aside from participating in a moot court argument you did not work on the nomination of Judge William Pryor. Now he was a controversial nominee, called Roe versus Wade the worst abomination in the history of constitutional law. He argued that a constitutional right to same-sex intimacy would logically extends to activity like necrophilia, bestiality, pedophilia. You said you didn't work on his nomination personally, but you did participate in the Pryor working group, did you not?  
KAVANAUGH:  We all met just so you know the process, there was something called the White House judicial selection committee. And Judge Gonzales, the Council to the president chaired that committee. That started immediately after President Bush came into office in 2001. And so we would meet with memos and individual members of the staff would be assigned to different 
LEAHY:  Did you interview William Pryor?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't believe so. It's possible but I don't believe so. But if I did it would've been part of the general process where people came in.  
LEAHY:  I'd put it in the record or Exhibit C which said you did interview him.  
KAVANAUGH:  It's possible. We interviewed hundreds of nominees, as I said, Senator. And we met every week for several years to go over nominees and we worked closely with the home state senators. I had various states for District Court. I had Illinois, I had California I worked on with Senator Feinstein and Senator Boxer's staff, Maryland Senator Sarbanes and Senator Mikulski. But then we would sit in sometimes on interviews of other people who came in and then we would meet and go over the memos. Then we'd meet with the president. We met every week with the president before September 11. After September 11 those meetings became less frequent.  
LEAHY:  You had recommended him internally for the 11th Circuit seat, had you not?  
KAVANAUGH:  I can't I have no reason that I wouldn't have recommended him because he was a highly qualified attorney general of Alabama and Senator Sessions of course knew him well and he was well respected.  
LEAHY:  The only reason I ask was one of the emails that we have up here says "Brett, at your request at your request I asked Matt to speak with Pryor about his interest."   
      I'm not asking these questions to get you in a bind, Judge. I'm asking them because it is so easy on these hearings to say I don't remember and often times that's the case. But you mentioned Mr. Gonzalez. He had difficulty remembering when he came here.   
      He had one hearing where so that he wouldn't have that problem I gave him I think 35, 45 of the questions ahead of time. On every one of them he said I don't remember, I don't recall. And then every question almost every question asked by both Republicans and Democrats said, I don't recall, I don't remember.  
      Shortly after that he went to private practice. But the I think it I think it is so difficult when that you don't remember the things done by somebody who I think on both sides of the aisle we would agree is one of the most egregious breaches of committee confidentiality when Manny Miranda stole material from here stole it to send it to you and others at the White House.   
      You have no recollection of that?  
KAVANAUGH:  I obviously recall the e-mails or I've seen the e-mails but your question your larger question was, did that raise a red flag? And I've answered that; no.  
HATCH:  Well, I when you were in the White House it was part of your job to coach President Bush's judicial nominees how to answer Democrat Democrats' questions about Roe v. Wade?  
KAVANAUGH:  Part of our job would've been to prepared nominees more generally and it was common for senators to ask that question then as it is now and so I assume that we would've been involved in going through mock sessions. I know I know we were involved in going through mock sessions which is very standard for democratic 
        
HATCH:  but you've been you've been going through some mock sessions with at least one Republican senator from this committee and and other Republican senators. And I'm not saying that as a gotcha thing; you have every right to do that. You did advise Priscilla Owen exactly how she should respond to that according to one of the e-mails.  
      And my last question, do you agree that a plastic firearm created with a 3D printer so that we would not have been in the minds of our founding fathers of the the 18th century would you agree that that could be regulated or banned without creating any Second Amendment questions?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think there might be litigation coming on that, Senator, so consistent with judicial independence principles I shouldn't comment on a potential case like that, so, thank you.  
HATCH:  I actually have written out your your answer ahead of time and and and I just wrote it so that you did not see what I wrote.   
      Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN:  Senator Graham?  
GRAHAM:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   
      I'd like to introduce into the record an op-ed from the LA Times editorial board entitled, "Can the Supreme Court confirmation process ever be repaired?" A bipartisan letter from 23 of Judge Kavanaugh's classmates at Yale; a letter signed by hundreds of Yale students, alumni, and faculty; a letter from Georgia Secretary of State, Brian Kemp, an op-ed in the Clarion Ledger by Mississippi Governor, Bill Bright. So I'd ask that that be allowed.   
      
GRAHAM:  Just say, "without objection." Yeah, that's good. OK. All right.  
      Thank you, Judge. There are several things I want to go over with you. One, I want to complement Senator Lee in this regard that he worked with Senator Grassley to get what had been previously committee confidential released to the public. And so that's the way it works around here; you don't always get what you want but you try to work with your colleagues and many times you you can succeed.  
      From the public's point of view it's got to work this way. You just can't do everything you want in a legislative body. There are rules and it's frustrating to be told no on something you're passionate about, but I'm often asked people wonder, are these hearings turning into a circus? And I want to defend circuses.  
        
      Circuses are entertaining, and you can take your children to them. This hearing is neither entertaining nor appropriate for young people.   
      Now, some of my colleagues who I respect greatly are trying to make a point. I don't know what that point is, but I do know this if you want to be president, which, I can understand that it's hard. And what you do will be the example others will follow.  
      Back to the subject matter the Morrison case. Was that about separation of powers?  
KAVANAUGH:  That that was a separation of powers case.  
GRAHAM:  OK. It was about a congressional statute and the authority of the executive branch and how they interacted. Is that correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct, and a very specific statutory scheme that was unprecedented and had the judiciary involved in appointing counsel.  
GRAHAM:  Right. And apparently Kagan and Scalia agreed 
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
GRAHAM:  Or but Kagan agreed with Scalia's dissent.  
KAVANAUGH:  She's called it one of the greatest ever written and she's added, it gets better every year.  
GRAHAM:  Well, I don't want to get in the habit of saying listen to Elena Kagan, but I will hear it, so because she's a fine person. The situation we have before us about Mr. Mueller that's not a separation of powers issue, is it? Aren't these different facts? That Mr. Mueller was appointed through Department of Justice regulations.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I don't want to talk specifically about current events, but I will just refer to what I've written previously about special counsel 
        
GRAHAM:  Well, I'm not asking you to how to decide a case. I'm just asking you, do you read the paper? Do do you watch television? The special counsel statute in question doesn't exist anymore, does it?  
KAVANAUGH:  The independent counsel statute  
GRAHAM:  Yeah, independent counsel statue.  
KAVANAUGH:  does not exist anymore since 1999.   
GRAHAM:  OK. OK.  
KAVANAUGH:  The traditional special counsel system I've written about is the ordinary way that outside investigation 
        
GRAHAM:  But is that an executive-branch function?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is ordinarily appointed by the Attorney General, and is 
        
GRAHAM:  Who's a member of what?  
KAVANAUGH:  The executive branch.  
GRAHAM:  So, last time I checked, that's not a separation of powers issue.  
KAVANAUGH:  That that traditionally, as I've written, has been an executive branch 
GRAHAM:  Now the question is, if someone's appointed as special counsel by Department of Justice regulations who has authority over implementing those regulations and overseeing those regulations all I can say is that that's different legally and factually than the Morrison situation where you had a statute.   
      Let's talk a little bit about the law regarding the president. Clinton v. Jones tells us see if I'm correct that you can be president of the United States, you can still be sued for conduct before you were president and when you invoke executive privilege the court has said no, wait a minute you have to show up at a deposition because it happened before you were president. Is that correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yeah, in a civil suit was the Clinton v. Jones case involving allegations that or a suit that involved activity before President Clinton became president.  
GRAHAM:  So it's it's pretty well understood, through Supreme Court precedent, that if you're the President of the United States and you engaged in conduct that allowed you to be sued before you got to be president, you can't avoid your day in court, now, on the civil side.  
      The Nixon holding said what?  
KAVANAUGH:  The Nixon holding said that, in the context of the specific regulations there, that a criminal trial subpoena to the president for information in that case, the tapes could be enforced, notwithstanding the executive privilege that was recognized in that case, as rooted in Article II of the Constitution.   
GRAHAM:  So that's the law of the land, as of this moment?  
KAVANAUGH:  That United States versus Nixon is the law of the land.  
GRAHAM:  OK. Now whether or not a president can be indicted while in office has been a discussion that's gone on for a very long time. Is that true in the legal world?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct. The Department of Justice for the last 45 years, has taken the consistent position through republican and democratic administrations, that a sitting president may not be indicted while in office. The most thorough opinion on that's written by Randy Moss, who was head of President Clinton's Office of Legal Counsel in the late - in 2000.   
      He's now a district judge, appointed by President Obama on the district court in D.C.  
GRAHAM:  I think you have written on this topic as well, haven't you?  
KAVANAUGH:  I have not written on the constitutionality.   
GRAHAM:  Did you talk about whether or not it would be wise to do this?  
KAVANAUGH:  I've made my thoughts known for Congress to examine 
GRAHAM:  Right.  
KAVANAUGH:  because in the wake of the September 11th, I thought one of the things Congress could look at is 
GRAHAM:  Yes.  
KAVANAUGH:  how to make the presidency more effective.  
GRAHAM:  I just want my democratic colleagues to remind you that when President Clinton was being investigated, you took the position that he's not above the law; but, in terms of indicting a sitting president, it would be better for the country to wait. And the person who echoed that the most or at least effectively, I thought, from his point of view was Joe Biden.  
      So there's nothing new here, folks. When it's a democratic president, they adopt the positions that they're arguing against now. But that's nothing new in politics. I'm sure we do the same thing.   
      So this man, Judge Kavanaugh, is not doing anything wrong by talking about this issue the way he talks about it. What we're doing wrong is blending concepts to justify a vote that's going be inevitable.  
      You don't have to play these games to vote, no. Just say you don't agree with his philosophy. You don't think he's qualified. But the thing that I hate the most is to take concepts and turn them around, upside down to make people believe there's something wrong with you.   
      There's nothing wrong with you, the fault lies on our side. Most Americans, after this hearing, will have a dimmer view of the Senate; rightly so. I don't want anybody to believe that you stole anything. Did you steal anything from anybody while you were working at the White House Counsels?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
GRAHAM:  Did you know that anybody stole anything or did you encourage them to steal anything?  
KAVANAUGH:  No,  
GRAHAM:  Did you use anything knowingly that was stolen?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
GRAHAM:  So you can talk about Mr. Miranda, and he deserves all the scorn you can heap on him. But I don't want the public to believe that you did anything wrong, because I don't believe you did. So it's OK to vote no. But it's not OK to take legal concepts and flip them upside down. In that like, we're doing something on the republican side when you had the exact same position, when it was your turn.  
      Roe v. Wade, you've heard of that case, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  I have, senator.  
GRAHAM:  Now, there are a lot of people that like it, a lot of people don't. It's an emotional debate in the country. The is there anything in the Constitution about a right to abortion, is anything written in the document?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the Supreme Court has recognized to right to abortion since the 1973 Roe v. Wade case 
GRAHAM:  Yes, but 
KAVANAUGH:  who's reaffirmed it many times.  
GRAHAM:  but my question is, did they find a phrase in the Constitution that said that the state cannot interfere with a woman's right to choose until medical viability occurs? Is that in the Constitution?  
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court applying the liberty 
GRAHAM:  It's a pretty simple, no, it's not, Senator Graham.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, the - I want to just be 
GRAHAM:  But those words.  
KAVANAUGH:  I want to be very careful because this is a 
GRAHAM:  OK.  
KAVANAUGH:  topic, on which 
GRAHAM:  No, if you'll just follow me, I'll let you talk.   
      But the point is, will you tell me, yes or no, is there anything in the document itself talking about limiting the state's ability to protect the unborn before viability? Is there any phrase in the Constitution about abortion?  
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court has found it under the liberty clause, but you're right that specific 
GRAHAM:  Was there anything in the liberty clause talking about abortion?  
KAVANAUGH:  The liberty clause refers to liberty, but not does not have 
GRAHAM:  OK. Well, the last time I checked, liberty 
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
GRAHAM:  didn't equate to abortion, I - the Supreme Court said it did. But here's the point, what are the limits on this concept? You had five, six, seven, eight or nine judges. What are the limits on the ability of the court to find a penumbra of rights that apply to a particular situation?  
      What are the checks and balances of the people in your business? If you can find five people who agree with you to confer a right, whether the public likes it or not, based on this concept on a penumbra of rights? What are the outer limits to this?  
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court in the Glucksberg case, which was in the late '90s and, Justice Kagan talked about this at her hearing is the the test that the Supreme Court uses to find unenumerated rights under the liberty clause of the Due Process Clause of the 14th Amendment. And that refers to rights rooted in the history and tradition of the of the country, so as to prevent 
GRAHAM:  So let me ask you this. Is there any right rooted into history and traditions of the country, where legislative bodies could not intercede on the behalf of the unborn before medical viability? Is that part of our history?  
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court precedent has recognized the right to abortion. I'm 
GRAHAM:  I'm just saying, what part of the history of our I don't think our founding fathers people mentioned our founding fathers, I don't remember that being part of American history. So how did the court determine that it was?  
KAVANAUGH:  The court applied the precedent that existed. And found, in 1973, that under the liberty clause 
GRAHAM:  Yes, but before 1970 I mean, when you talk about the history of the United States, the court has found that part of our history is for the legislative bodies not to have a say about protecting the unborn until medical viability.   
      I don't - I haven't - whether you agree with it or not, I don't think that's part of our history. So fill in the blank. What are the limits of people in your business applying that concept to almost anything that you think to be liberty?  
KAVANAUGH:  And that that is the concern that some have expressed about the concept of unenumerated rights.  
GRAHAM:  Well, here's the concern I have, that you got one word that has opened up the ability for five people to tell everybody elected in the country, you can't go there; that this is an off-limits in a democratic process.  
      Whether you agree with Roe v. Wade or not just think what could happen down the road if five people determine the word liberty means "X" the only real check and balance is a constitutional amendment to change the ruling. Do you agree with that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I'm not going to comment on potential constitutional amendments or  
        
GRAHAM:  But OK. How if we pass the statute tomorrow in Congress saying that the Congress can regulate abortions before medical liability, wouldn't that fly in the face of Roe v. Wade?  
KAVANAUGH:  Sir, the Supreme Court has said that a woman has a constitutional right 
GRAHAM:  Doesn't that trump a statute?  
KAVANAUGH:  It does. Supreme Court precedent 
GRAHAM:  So all of us could vote because five people have said liberty means right to an the state has no interest here compelling interest before medical viability that we could pass all the laws we want, it doesn't matter because they fall.   
      The only way we can change that is the constitutional amendment process. It requires 2/3 of the House, 2/3 of the Senate, 3/4 of the state. Is that a pretty correct legal analysis?  
KAVANAUGH:  When the Supreme Court is issued a constitutional ruling 
GRAHAM:  Then you can only change it by constitutional amendment. '  
KAVANAUGH:  That's the  
GRAHAM:  So here's the point, whether you agree with Roe v. Wade or not, the reason some legal scholars object to this concept is breathtakingly unlimited. Whatever five people believe at any given time in history, in terms of the word liberty, they could rewrite our history and come up with a new history.  
      And I think the best way for democracies to make history is to have the court interpret the Constitution, be a check and balance on us, not take one word and create a concept that is breathtaking in terms of his application to restrict the legislative process.  
      Now, whether you agree with me or not, I think there is a genuine debate and you would agree with me if it was something you liked or you were supporting that got shut out or you opposed you couldn't do.  
      So I hope that one day the Court will sit down and think long and hard about the path they've charted and not just about abortion; whether or not it's right for people in your business on any given day based on any given case of controversy to say that the word liberty looking at the history of the country and the number of rights meets "X."  
      And it shuts out all of us who have gone to the ballot box and gone through the test of being elected. All I ask is that you think about it.   
      Also I want to ask you about something else to think about. You said you were in the White House on 9/11. Is that correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is correct, Senator.  
GRAHAM:  Did you believe America was under attack?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes. It was under attack.  
GRAHAM:  Right. Do you believe that if the terrorists could strike any city in the world and they had like a you get a one shot at the world, based on your time in the White House, do you believe they'd pick an American city probably over any other city?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, it certainly seemed that New York and Washington D.C. were the two targets.  
GRAHAM:  The only reason I mentioned that to my good friends and they are who believe that America is not part of the battlefield it sure was on 9/11.   
      The law:  If an American citizen goes to Afghanistan and takes up the fight against our forces and they're captured in Afghanistan, the current law is you can be held as an enemy combatant in spite of your citizenship. Is that correct? Is that the Hamdi Decision?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's what the Supreme Court said in the Hamdi Decision with appropriate due process findings.  
GRAHAM:  Absolutely. Appropriate due process findings. Here's what I want people in your business to think about. Are you aware of the fact that the radical Islamic group are trying to recruit America to their cause Americans to their cause? That they are over the internet trying to get Americans to take up Jihad?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
GRAHAM:  The likelihood of an American citizen joining their cause is real because it's happened in the past. The likelihood of it happening in the future, I think, is highly likely. If an American citizen attacking the embassy in Kabul can be held as an American citizen, here's the question.  
      Can an American citizen, collaborating with other terrorist who are not American citizens be held as an enemy combatant for attacking the capital? And if they can't, you're incentivizing the enemy defined in an American citizen because they have a privilege that no other terrorist would have.   
      So you said something that was very compelling to me. That you apply the law and you have to understand how it affects people. Right?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, sir.  
GRAHAM:  I hope you will understand that this war is not over, that the ware is coming back to our shores. It's just a matter of time before they hit us again because we have to be right all the time and they haven't to be right one of the time one time.   
      I hope we don't create a process where, if you can come to America, you get a special deal. It makes it harder for us to deal with you and find out what you know. We treat you as a common criminal versus the warrior you've become.  
      That's just my parting thought to you. And you'll decide the way you think is best for the country. Is there anything you want to say about this process that would help us make it better because you're going to get confirmed.   
      I worry about the people coming after you. Every time we have one of these hearings it gets worse and worse and worse. You've sat there patiently for a couple of days. My colleagues have asked you tough questions, sometimes unfair questions.   
      Your time is about over. You're going to make it and you would probably be smart not to answer at all but I'm going to give you a chance to tell us what could we do better, if anything?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I'm just going to thank all of the senators on the committee and all of the senators I met with who are not on the committee for their time and their care. And as I've said, each senator is committed to public service and a public good in my opinion and I appreciate all the time of the senators. And I'm on the sunrise side of the mountain and I'm an optimist about the future, Senator.  
GRAHAM:  Thank you very much.  
GRASSLEY:  We're before we break I want to bring up some information because I was wondering how long it would take the National Archives to get the material that we needed because you've heard several times that the that the archives that's their responsibility.  
      The National Archives has 13 archivists who handled George W. Bush's presidential records. They can only review about 1,000 pages per week. And we could not have gotten these documents for 37 weeks if we didn't get President Bush's team to expedite the review process for the benefit of all members of the committee.   
      We received all the documents we would have received from the archivist just as a faster at a faster time. We'll now take 15 minutes and resume at 12:22.  
        
GRASSLEY:  Tell me tell me when you're ready, Judge.  
KAVANAUGH:  I am ready.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Durbin?  
DURBIN:  Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Let me say at the outset, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the way you've presided over this Committee. It's been a challenge for the last several days, but you and I have been through battles in the past, both as allies and as enemies, and you've always shown fairness, and I appreciate the fairness you've shown during the course of this hearing.  
      I also want to say a word about the protesters who've interrupted the hearing from time to time. As I said at the outset, this is one of the costs of democracy, and it's one which the Senate Judiciary Committee, which has been constructed for the purpose of guarding our Constitution, should value even when it's inconvenient.  
      I I will I could go into a long riff here, but I won't in the interest of time, but I don't know who organized these protests or why they did it, but thank goodness in the United States of American where we venerate free speech, these things can happen.  
      I want to thank the men and women of the Capitol Police and those who have been in charge of our security during this period of time as well.   
      I would like to also ask for two things to be entered into the record. First is record statements and opposition to the Kavanaugh nomination from several groups with unanimous consent.  
GRASSLEY:  Without objection.  
DURBIN:  Thank you very much.   
      And secondly, Senator Grassley closed the the earlier last session by with some comment I I'll have to read in its entirety to understand, but I think he said or someone said it would take 37 weeks for the National Archives to go through Judge Kavanaugh's record. I'd like to enter into the record a letter from August 2nd, 2018 from Gary Stern, General Counsel of the National Archives, which concludes with the following statement, "by the end of October 2018, we would have completed the remaining 600,000 pages that we are should be considering and unfortunately cannot."  
      So I'd ask consent to enter that letter into the official record.  
GRASSLEY:  Without objection.  
DURBIN:  Thank you very much.   
      Judge Kavanaugh, I remember when I got my results from my Bar exam, I thought to myself, "well, that'll be the last time I ever have to sit down and take an exam." So at the end of this day, this may be your last formal exam in terms of your legal career. I'm sure there's a sense of expectation, hopefulness, and relief in that.  
      I want to thank you wife for being here and for bringing those beautiful daughters. I hope some day they will understand what happened to their father in a few days here, but thank you so much for being part of this hearing.  
      Judge, when I started this, I said this is not just about filling a key vacancy on the Supreme Court, a deciding vote on the court, a vote which may decide life and death issues on important cases. It's more than the question of release of documents.   
      It is really goes to the heart of where we are in America at this moment. You have been nominated to be a justice on the United States Supreme Court by President Donald Trump. We have to take your nomination in the context of this moment in history.  
      We're in a moment at a moment where the president has shown contempt for the federal judiciary unlike any president we can recall. He has shown disrespect for the rule of law over and over again. He has repeatedly ridiculed the Attorney General of the United States, whom he chose. He has called for blatant partisanship in the prosecution of our laws. He is a president who is the subject of an active criminal investigation an investigation which he has apparently sought to obstruct repeatedly.  
      He is a president who has been characterized in this hearing, publicly, on the record as an unindicted co-conspirator. And in the last two days during the course of this hearing, there have been two incredible events the release of a book and an article in the New York Times, which remind us, again what a serious moment we face in the history of the United States.  
      And that's why your nomination is different than any; I can't recall any that have ever been brought before us in this context. I can't recall so many people across the United States following this as carefully perhaps Clarence Thomas, at that time, everybody in America was tuned in. But it's in the context of the Trump presidency that we ask you these questions in anticipation that you may face issues involving this president, which no other Supreme Court has been asked to face.  
      And that is why I want to address your view of the power of this president the authority of this president because it's an important, contemporary question, which, of course, has application far beyond his presidency.  
      You've quoted me several times thank you yesterday regarding the Independent Counsel Statute. As our Republican colleagues are fond of reminding us, judges are not legislators. So to state the obvious, my opposition or any legislator's opposition to reauthorizing a statute is very different from a judge's opinion on whether a statute is unconstitutional.  
      To get to the heart of the matter, the reason why we continue to return to the Morrison v. Olson decision is because of its significance in light of the Trump presidency. The reason we're so interested in your view that that case was wrongly decided has little to do with the statute that was in question. It has everything to do with your views on the power of the executive and what that would mean for this president and future presidents if you join the Supreme Court.  
      Justice Scalia's Morrison v. Olson sole dissent embraces the so-called unitary executive theory, which grants sweeping powers to the PRESIDENT of the United States. Scalia said, and I quote, "we should say here that the president's constitutionally assigned duties include complete control over investigation and prosecution of violation of law and that the inexorable command of Article II is clear and definite. The executive power must be vested in the President of the United States."  
      In this age of President Donald Trump, this expansive view of presidential power takes on added significance. Earlier this year, the Senate Judiciary Committee reported a bipartisan bill to protect the independence of the Special Counsel, Bob Mueller. Several Republican senators who are here today cited Scalia's dissent to justify their opposition to a bill protecting this Special Counsel, with one even saying, and I quote, "many of us think we are bound by Scalia's dissent."  
      At the time, I joked and said instead of dealing with stare decisis, we're dealing with Scalia decisis. Given your views on Morrison v. Olson, we are obviously worried that you will feel bound by this dissent by Antonin Scalia if President Trump decides to attempt to fire the Special Counsel Bob Mueller.  
      It doesn't stop there. You cited Scalia's dissent in the case involving the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, where you gutted that agency. And in the 2011 Seven-Sky case, you dissented from a decision upholding the Affordable Care Act and made a breathtaking claim of presidential power, which has been repeated over and over again.  
      And you said under the Constitution, the president may decline to enforce a statute that regulates private individuals when the president deems the statute constitutional, even if a court has held or would hold the statute constitutional your words.  
      Of course, the unitary executive theory was the basis for President Bush's December 30th, 2005 signing statement, claiming the authority to override the McCain torture amendment. Yesterday, I asked you what comments you made on the signing statement as President Bush's Staff Secretary.  
      Senator Feinstein asked a similar question this morning. What you told me was I can't recall what I said. I do recall there was a good deal of internal debate about that signing statement, as you can imagine. I do remember it would be controversial internally.  
      It's hard to imagine you can't remember that controversial issue. Given our concerns about your views on executive power, it's important for you at this moment please to clarify for us the power of the presidency in this age of Donald Trump.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, thank you first, thank you for your comments about my wife and daughters. My daughters are will return this afternoon for return engagements, so they'll experience democracy once again in action, and I appreciate that.  
      On Morrison v. Olson, a couple of things at the outset. First, that case did not involve the Special Counsel system. I have written repeatedly that the traditional Special Counsel system, which we have now and have had historically, is a distinct system appointed by the Attorney General.  
      Morrison has nothing to do with that, that dealt with the old Independent Counsel statute, as you said, which is expired in 1999 under overwhelming consensus that that statute was inappropriate, unrestrained, unaccountable as you said.  
      Secondly, Morrison Justice Scalia's dissent, that does not affect the precedent of Humphrey's Executor. Humphrey's Executor is the Supreme Court precedent that allows independent agencies to exist. Those independent regulatory agencies continue to exist, of course.  
      So both on the independent agency side, those are unaffected. On the Special Counsel side, that's unaffected. You mentioned the CFPB gate CFPB case. That my decision in that case would have allowed that agency to continue operating in performing its important function for American consumers.  
      The only correction would have been in the structure because it was a novel structure that was unlike every other independent agency that had been created previously. As to the concept of prosecutorial discretion that's referred to in the 2011 case, that is a traditional concept, prosecutorial discretion, that's recognized in the Executive Branch.  
      The limits of that are uncertain, that's arisen in the immigration context with President Obama. There's debates about what the limits are, those are not finely determined. But the basic concept of prosecutorial discretion is all I was referring to there.  
      I've made clear in my writings that a court order that requires a president to do something or prohibits a president from doing something under the Constitution or laws of the United States is the final word in our system, our separation of powers system.  
      That's Cooper v. Aaron, that's Marbury v. Madison, that's United States v. Richard Nixon, that is an important principle.  
      And finally, I would say that the question of who controls the executive power within the Executive Branch, the vertical question, you have the president at the top, you have independent agencies which exist consistent with precedent is distinct from the question of what's the scope of the executive power vis-a-vis Congress?  
      On that latter question, the scope of executive power vis-a-vis Congress, I've made clear in the context of national security, the Youngstown framework, context of administrative law, my cases questioning unilateral executive rewriting of the law, in the criminal law where I've reversed convictions, and I am one not afraid at all through my record of 12 years to invalidate executive power when   
DURBIN:  Judge, let me let me ask you this, because you've referred to Judge Youngstown case in the context of a war and a decision by a president that was immensely unpopular.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
DURBIN:  And the decision or it might have been popular, I should say, and the decision of the Supreme Court, which could have been very unpopular at that moment in history. Do you what I'm trying to ask you is in historic context, do you understand where we are as a nation now?  
      When books are being written about how democracy dies, when fair of authoritarian rule and the expansion of the Executive Branch is rampant in this country, when illustrations of that are found around the rule, why we are asking you over and over again, give us some reassurance about your commitment to the Democratic institutions of this country in face in the face of a president who seems prepared to cast them aside.  
      Whether it's voter suppression, the role of the media, case after case we hear this president willing to walk away from the rule of law in this country. That's the historic context which this is in not a particular case, but a particular moment in history.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, my 12 year record shows and my statements to the committee show and all my teaching and articles show   

KAVANAUGH:  show my commitment to the independence of the judiciary as the crown jewel of our constitutional republic.   
      My citing of Justice Kennedy, for whom I worked who left us a legacy of liberty, but also a legacy of adherence to the rule of law in the United States of America.  
      No one's above the law in the United States. That's a foundational principle that I've talked about coming from Federalist 69, coming from right at the structure of the Constitution. We're all equal before the law in the United States of America.  
      And I've made clear my deep faith in the judiciary. The judiciary has been the final guarantor of the rule of law. As I said in my opening, the Supreme Court is the last line of defense for the separation of powers and for the rights and liberties guaranteed by the Constitution and laws of the United States.  
DURBIN:  You see, that's why the unitary theory of the executive is so worrisome. What you have said is what I want to hear from a co-equal and very important branch of our government. But what you have said in relation to Morrison suggests the president has the last word.  
KAVANAUGH:  I have not said that, senator. And I'll reiterate something I said I said a minute ago, coming from Cooper v. Aaron, coming from Marbury; when a court order requires a president to do something or prohibits a president from doing something under the constitutional laws of the United States, under our constitutional system, that is the final word.  
DURBIN:  Let me ask you one last time the question you knew I've asked about your testimony in 2006.   
      I'm just struggling with the fact that when I ask you about this issue of detention, interrogation and torture you gave such a simple declarative answer to me and said that, "I was not involved and am not involved in the questions about the rules governing detention of combatants." We have found at least three specific examples where you were; three.  
      Your discussions about the access to counsel for detainees, your involvement in the Hamdi and Padilla cases and your involvement with President Bush's signing statement on the McCain torture amendment.   
      Judge Kavanaugh, you say that words matter. You claim to be a textualist when you interpret other people's words, but you don't want to be held accountable for the plain meaning of your own words. Why is it so difficult for you to acknowledge your response to the question and acknowledge that at least your answer was misleading, if not wrong?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, you had a concern at the time of the 2006 hearing, which was understandable, whether I'd been involved in crafting be detention policies, interrogation policies that were so controversial that the legal memos had been written in the Department of Justice that were very controversial.  
      As you know and as the committee knew then, two judicial nominees to the Courts of Appeals had been involved in working on some of the memos related to that program. Senator Feinstein led the Intelligence Committee investigation of that matter produced a massive report, a large unclassified report and apparently an even larger classified report.  
      The Justice Department Office of Professional Responsibility produced a long report about all the lawyers who were involved. I was not involved in crafting those policies.  
DURBIN:  But do you deny being involved in the three specific areas involving detention interrogation which I've just read to you. Do you say that you had nothing to do with the Hamdi and Padilla cases? That you weren't involved in the conversation about access to counsel for detainees? That you weren't involved in President Bush's decision on a signing statement on the McCain torture amendment? Are you saying that none of those things occurred?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, what I've made clear is I understood your question then and I still understand it now and I understood my answer then and I still understand it now to be about those legal memos. I was not read into that program. I was not involved. My name does not appear on Senator Feinstein's report.  
DURBIN:  That's not the question I asked. Do you deny the three specific instances where you were involved in questions involving detentions and interrogation?  
KAVANAUGH:  That was the question that I saw that you asked at the time of that hearing and my answer was then, and is now, as Senator Feinstein's report shows and as the professional responsibility report shows, I was not read into that program.  
DURBIN:  That is not-I didn't ask you about that program. I asked you about the three specific instances. You keep answering, oh I wasn't Feinstein is my defense. She came to my rescue. She was talking about something else.   
      I've asked you about three specific instances where we have written proof and sworn testimony from you now that you were involved in these three things and all of them relate to detention and interrogation, which you gave me your assurance you weren't involved in.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I'm going to distinguish two things. One are, what you are asking me in 2006 and my testimony then was accurate and was the truth. What you're asking me now is, for example, on the signing statement as we discussed in your office, I made clear that of course as staff secretary everything that went to the president for a three-year period, with a few covert exceptions, would have crossed my desk on the way from the counsel's office or the policy advisor or wherever it was going and would've made its way to the president's desk and that includes that signing statement.  
DURBIN:  Well, let me just close. I don't think the staff secretary to the United States president is a file clerk.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right.  
DURBIN:  What you have explained to us over and over again this was a formative moment in your public career. You were given constitutional issue advice as well as making substantive changes in drafts that were headed for the president's desk and one of them involved John McCain's torture amendment. And that to me is involved directly on detention and interrogation. And I think, unfortunately, your answer does not reflect that.  
GRASSLEY:  If you want to speak to that then we'll go to Senator Lee.  
KAVANAUGH:  I just want to close, Mr. Chairman, by thanking Senator Durbin and in response to his questions about the judiciary the role of the judiciary he gave me a book when we met, a biography of Frank Johnson. And that Friday night after a lot of Senate meetings and a lot of practice sessions I went home, read the whole thing and I appreciated it. It's a good model of judicial independence. It's a great story about someone who was a judge in the South in the civil-rights era stood firm for the rule of law and so a good model. I thank Senator Durbin for giving me the book.  
DURBIN:  Thank you. Now if I can just say one more word. Thank you, Judge Kavanaugh. That night obviously the Nationals weren't playing.  
        
KAVANAUGH:  Yes  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Lee.  
LEE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, again, Judge Kavanaugh for your willingness to answer our questions.  
      I just want to follow up a little bit on this last line of questioning from Senator Durbin. Senator Durbin and I actually, notwithstanding the fact that we come from different parts of the country, have different political ideologies, come from different political parties. We share many views in common and this is one area indefinite detention where he and I are concerned about the government not overreaching.  
      Only as I look at this I think this cuts in your favor, not against you. Tell me if I'm missing something. In the first place what you were asked about was whether or not you were involved in crafting the policies that would govern detention of enemy combatants; is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
LEE:  And that was a classified program classified at a very high level. Presumably compartmentalized such that you would've had to have been read into that program in order to participate in that process; is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  I believe that's correct. Read in, I wasn't necessarily using the formal sense of that but what I meant is I was not part of that program.  
LEE:  Okay. But that is a binary issue. You were either involved in the development of that policy or you were not.  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
LEE:  And you were not?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
LEE:  And Tim Flanagan who was, I believe, at the time the White House counsel-  
KAVANAUGH:  He was the deputy counsel.  
LEE:  The deputy counsel has confirmed that you were not involved in that.  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
LEE:  We have your word and the word of the then deputy White House counsel. Then there is a separate issue. Well, I guess one could argue a related issue but 

GRASSLEY:  I don't know if it's worth it, but what he says, I've not read into it. I don't know whether people understand what that means.  
LEE:  I assume that won't be counted against me there.  
GRASSLEY:  It will be counted.  
LEE:  Oh, OK.  
        
      All right, well I'll have to speak more quickly then. When we talk about being read into, that is a colloquial term that we sometimes refer to. It's government speak that talks about being cleared to discuss certainly classified matters. In any event, you were not brought into the development of this policy.  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
LEE:  Secondly, there was a separate, arguably related, but a distinct issue involving a meeting where you were asked for you opinion about how Justice Kennedy might react to certain legal arguments that people in the administration were pushing. Is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
LEE:  And you answered that questions.  
KAVANAUGH:  I said that indefinite detention of an American citizen without access to a lawyer, which at the time was the what was happening in that particular case would never fly with Justice Kennedy.  
LEE:  And I happen to agree with you on that, and it seems like a fairly unremarkable proposition to me. I don't think anyone disputes that that argument had problems with it, that that argument wouldn't fly with Justice Kennedy. And I therefore have difficulty seeing how this cuts against you.  
      As someone who believes in civil liberties and who shares many of the same concerns that have been expressed by many of my Democratic colleagues, I think the advice you offered here was accurate. I think it was good advice.  
      It certainly is not inconsistent with the statement you provided, which was that you were not involved in the development of the policy governing the program. Sometimes as lawyers we're called upon to offer litigation strategy. Sometimes we're called upon to handle litigation. Other times as lawyers, particularly in the government, we might be called upon to develop a policy.  
      Here, you were involved in neither handling the litigation directly nor in developing the policy. You went to a meeting, somebody asked that question, you gave them your answer.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, that's correct, and it was about something entirely separate from that policy or the legal memo.  
LEE:  Separate and distinct from that policy. It was about a litigating position that dealt sort of in the same universe, but not with that policy.  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
LEE:  I therefore have grave difficulty in seeing that you did anything but the right thing and that you answered this question in any way other than with the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.  
      Let me turn next while we're talking about colleagues with whom I often agree and with whom I often work across the aisle. Senator Booker is a good friend of mine and he is a colleague, but he and I work together on a lot of issues. He raised an issue last night that I wanted to touch on with you.  
      He raised an issue related to some emails. I was concerned at the time that you didn't have the emails in front of you, and I think that's very important for any witness in any preceding to be given access to the documents, documents that in this case were prepared some 18 years ago.  
      You, as a lawyer, have no doubt been involved in the creation of many, hundreds of thousands, possibly millions of documents. To ask you to recall from memory something you wrote 18 years ago is going to be difficult at any moment.  
      In any event, these emails deal with an issue involving some questions surrounding a Supreme Court case called Adarand Constructor versus Mineta. So let's refer to a document 00289596.  
      As I understand it, you were being asked in this instance to provide some advice on what might happen if a particular argument were presented to the Supreme Court on the merits. You looked at some Department of Transportation contracting regulations, and as I understand it correct me if I'm wrong if I understood it correctly, the government was considering making a series of arguments before the Supreme Court, and you did what a good lawyer should do when advancing an argument to the court.  
      You counted to five. You identified five Supreme Court justices who you believed would not accept the governments argument in defense of those DOT regulations. Is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct. Under the precedent that existed at the time the Crocin precedent I think was the most relevant precedent.  
LEE:  And so and yet at the time, the Supreme Court of the United States had already granted review of the case granted certiorari, meaning that the Supreme Court, unlike most appellate courts, is in change with very, very few exceptions remaining today of its own docket. It decides which of the 10,000 or so cases that wan to go to the Supreme Court each year will, in fact, be reviewed by the court.  
      The court had already granted certiorari, granted in review in that case. Is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct I believe.  
LEE:  So as I read these emails, I read your argument is saying, OK, number one, you cannot count to five here because I'm identifying "I, Brett Kavanaugh, have identified there are grave doubts as to whether Chief Justice Rehnquist, Justice Scalia, Justice Thomas, Justice Kennedy, or Justice O'Connor can embrace these arguments in defense of these Department of Transportation regulations."  
      But the court has already granted certiorari, so what to do? As I understand the emails, and correct me if I'm wrong, you recommended a course of action that would allow the government to make its case, but to make its case in a way that it would allow the court to decide that perhaps it shouldn't have granted review in the case. Am I correct so far?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct, Senator.  
LEE:  And what is that called when the court decides that it shouldn't have granted a case?  
KAVANAUGH:  Dismissing as improperly granted or other colloquial known as DIGed.  
LEE:  As a DIG?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
LEE:  So you came up with a strategy for the purpose of encouraging the court to DIG a case that it had previously granted, because you believed the government was going to lose, and the regulations at issue were going to be invalidated, and you didn't want the government to have to endure that. Did they accept your arguments?  
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court did. Yes.  
LEE:  So the government the Bush administration, the solicitor general's office, followed your advice and wrote the arguments as you had prescribed, thus prompting a DIG. And as a result, the regulations stood. Isn't that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  I believe that's so, Senator.  
LEE:  They stood where they otherwise would have fallen.  
KAVANAUGH:  That's right.  
LEE:  OK, so here again, I have a hard time seeing this as anything other than something that helps you that helps you not just with Republicans but that helps you with Democrats. You saw a problem with an argument the government was making. You identified that problem. You offered a remedy. That remedy was embraced by the Solicitor General's Office and the Department of Justice, and the court did exactly as you wanted it to do. And as a result the regulation stood.  
      The regulation that Senator Booker is concerned about, was wanting to make sure was not under attack unfairly was, in fact, preserved. I have a hard time seeing why that shouldn't make him want to vote more for you. In fact, I I I think Senator Booker really should vote for you; I'll have that conversation with him later.   
      OK, one additional response to last night's round of questions. Last night, at the at the end of a of a grueling day, my friend and colleague, Senator Harris from California, asked you whether you had ever spoken to anyone at the law firm of Kasowitz, Benson and Torres about the Mueller investigation.  
      She even implored you to be sure about your answer, which I suppose is is good advice in any context, but it, you know it can perhaps sound somewhat ominous. The issue with this question is that Kasowitz, if I understand it correctly, is a law firm that includes 350 lawyers in nine U.S. cities. And I I'm guessing not even Mr. Kasowitz himself, who started the firm, can even name every single attorney.   
      Could you name every attorney that works at that firm?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
LEE:  As you sit here, can you rule out the possibility that you may have close friends, former law clerks, former law school classmates who might work or might have worked at that firm at some point?  
KAVANAUGH:  Might have worked I I don't know who works at that firm other than a few people I'm aware of, just from the public I gather Senator Lieberman works at the firm? I did not know that last night.  
LEE:  That is correct. I didn't either, but I found that out last night. Can you name the nine cities where this firm has offices?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
LEE:  So my my colleague's question may be a very direct question, but it's it's it's something that I think in this circumstance is is unfair if you can't identify the people that she has in mind or you don't even know who works here.  
      So let me ask you something that that may get at her underlying concern, but in a way that I think is fair. Because I think each of my colleagues who, when they have concerns, when they have questions, they they deserve to be able to have their concerns addressed. So let me ask you in a way that I think is fair.   
      Have you made any promises or any guarantees to anyone about how you would vote on any case that might come before you if you're confirmed to the Supreme Court of the United States?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
LEE:  Have you had any improper conversation with anyone about the Mueller investigation?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
LEE:  Let's talk a little bit about executive power. Is the President of the United States absolutely immune from any and all legal action, whether civil or criminal?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the foundation of our Constitution was that, as Hamilton explained in Federalist 69, the presidency would not be a monarchy and and it specified all the ways that under the Constitution the President is not above the law. No one is above the law in the United States of America; the President is subject to the law. The Supreme Court president precedent in cases such as Clinton v. Jones, United States v. Richard Nixon establishes those principles, cases like Youngstown establish it in the official capacity, in Marbury v. Madison in an official capacity.  
      So the President has is authority under the Constitution, the executive power under the Constitution, the President as established by the framers of the Constitution is not above the law. No no one's above the law in the United States of America.  
LEE:  As a practical matter, who investigates the President?  
KAVANAUGH:  As a practical matter, traditionally as I've written about in the Georgetown Law Journal article and written about elsewhere, when there is an allegation of wrongdoing by someone in the Executive Branch as to whom there might be a conflict of interest if the ordinary Justice Department process took place, there has been traditionally the appointment by the Attorney General of a Special Counsel.  
      That's gone back for 100 years or so of that kind of outside counsel appointed. And of course we saw that in Watergate, but we've seen it lots of other times where Special Counsels have been appointed for particular matters where there is otherwise a conflict of interest or perceived conflict of interest of some kind.  
LEE:  Now, I've I've had colleagues who have worried about your view that Morrison was wrongly decided. Now, your view, just to be clear, is that Morrison applies only in a special context no longer relevant here, is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
LEE:  What context is that?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's the context of the old Independent Counsel statute, which is distinct from the Special Counsel system. The old Independent Counsel statute had a lot of features to it and that statute was viewed by the Congress when it reconsidered it in 1999 as being unrestrained, unaccountable, impermissible and the statute was not renewed.  
      And the Morrison case was thus a one-off case as I see it, about a one-off statute that no longer exists.  
LEE:  And that's why you can talk about it?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's why Justice Kagan can talk about it and that's why I also have talked about it.  
LEE:  These are the vestigial remains of of a of a once existing but no longer it's a dinosaur, in in legal terms.   
      What about your opinion on PHH? Now, in the PHS PHH is is really limited to independent agencies, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's right. The governing precedent on independent agencies so think the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission or the Federal Communications Commission or the Securities and Exchange Commission whole range of independent agencies governed by Humphrey's Executor, the 1935 precedent of the Supreme Court, which established that the that those are permissible.  
      There ordinarily, traditionally have been multi-member bodies and that was a problem, I thought, in the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau case, that it was only a single director independent agency. But I would've the remedy would have still allowed that agency to continue operating and performing its consumer functions and protecting consumers from improper behavior.  
LEE:  What what's the biggest single difference between the Independent Counsel statute, which is now a dinosaur, and and the Special Counsel regulations, which are still in effect?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, there are a whole host of differences. The appointment mechanism was different, the removal mechanism was different, the jurisdictional mechanism was different, the how Justice Department policies applied were different.  
      It was there were so many different features of that old Independent Counsel statute that combined to convince Congress that that statute was a mistake worse than a mistake really and also showed I think why the statute was inconsistent with our constitutional traditions.  
LEE:  And the reason for that is because when you create an entity within the federal government, within the Executive Branch that is not accountable to anyone, it sounds appetizing, it sounds appealing to some at the outset, to say, well, we're insulating it from from political forces. But what that really means is that it's not accountable to anyone; it's not accountable to anyone who is in turn elected.   
      Wasn't that really the problem that Justice Scalia was pointing out in Morrison?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is what he pointed out. It's what Senator Durbin and many others on this committee and elsewhere pointed out after experience with the statute for some years and then seeing how it operated in practice I think there was overwhelming bipartisan agreement that the statute had not operated in a good way and that the flaws in the statute's operation stemmed from some of these features of its design that you just discussed which distinguished it from the traditional special counsel system that we had had and then starting in 1999 have had since 1999 to the present.  
LEE:  What were we dealing with in Watergate? The special counsel or an independent counsel?  
KAVANAUGH:  It was a special the traditional special counsel. The kind we have had historically and the kind that we now have and have had since 1999 of the traditional special counsel system.  
LEE:  It was appointed by regulation, not by statute. Nixon fired him. Nixon fired Archibald Cox, and we all know how that turned out. And I'm not going to ask you to respond to this, but it seems to me that this remains an effective tool. It's not as though the absence of the independent counsel statute renders the president completely immune because that simply isn't the case.  
      You've never taken a position on the immunity question, on the question of whether the president is immune from prosecution.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, just to be technically accurate, the question is deferral, not immunity. So the constitutionality of indicting a sitting president. I have never taken a position on that. The Justice Department for 45 years has taken the position that a sitting president may not be indicted while in office and that's the Justice Department's longstanding position under presidents of both parties, but I have not taken a position on the constitutionality of that.  
LEE:  And among academics and practitioners of every ideological stripe that I know of, that's where the dispute is. Not whether there is absolute immunity so much as the timing of it.  
KAVANAUGH:  It's all about the timing. It's not an immunity question. Correct, Senator.  
LEE:  There are people on both ends of the ideological spectrum who take different positions on that.  
GRASSLEY:  Let me we're going to before I give the schedule because we're soon going to break for lunch. I've had another request for documents, so I'd like to give you an update on that.   
      After two deadlines that only Senator Klobuchar honored, my staff stayed up all night pushing the Department of Justice and the former president to make public every committee confidential document the minority has requested, including a request after midnight. Senator Leahy made a request today, and we have pushed the Department of Justice and the former president to honor this request. They have agreed and will be producing the documents imminently.  
      And so like with Justice Gorsuch confirmation, the process that I set up works when it's followed. We'll now take a 30-minute lunch break.  
CORNYN:  Mr. Chairman, may I ask a brief question about that?  
WHITEHOUSE:  I have a question about that too.  

CORNYN:  I couldn't hear what everything you said so I want to clarify. It's my understanding that every document requested by any Senator that had previously been designated as committee confidential has now been vetted and made available to that senator, or it will be shortly.  
GRASSLEY:  Yes, including what Senator Leahy asked for today. Before I read the schedule oh, I'm sorry. I didn't 
CORNYN:  No, I'm just going to make the point so there is nothing that a senator has requested that has not been paid available to them, and then been properly vetted with the Department of Justice, and now is available to the public.  
GRASSLEY:  And before I make the announcement on the schedule 
WHITEHOUSE:  Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Yes, you'll be the yes, go ahead.  
WHITEHOUSE:  I think I'm the lead-off batter when we return.  
GRASSLEY:  Yes. Yes.  
WHITEHOUSE:  I'm told that we have a vote that is scheduled to begin at 1:45 now.   
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
WHITEHOUSE:  They often don't begin exactly at 1:45. Could you please build in time so that I may vote and come back here.  
GRASSLEY:  Well, we're don't go yet. We're going to accommodate you from this respect. So we're going to take a 30-minute lunch break. It might be longer than that so be alert, judge. There are two votes but I'm hoping you will vote first, come back, do your questioning and go back and vote on the second one. And I should probably come back unless I get some other Republican to come back, and I'll do the same thing. And then we'll proceed that way through the two votes. Adjourned not.  
