GRASSLEY:  Good morning, everybody. I welcome you to our fourth and final day of the Kavanaugh confirmation hearing.  
      Over the last three days, the American people hard heard directly from the judge. He sat through hours and hours, and I think my staff calculated 32-1/2 hours of our colleagues' statements and of course our colleagues' questioning.   
      I think he made a very compelling case that he is one of the most qualified nominees, if not the most qualified, that we've seen for the Supreme Court of the United States. And I have seen I think 15 of them.  
      He demonstrated that his 12 years of exemplary judicial service on the nation's second highest court uniquely qualifies him for a promotion to the nation's highest court.  
      In fact, on today's first panel, we'll hear from two witnesses from the American Bar Association. The ABA, whose assessment, particularly by Democrat leaders I like to quote that they refer to it as a gold standard of judicial evaluation, has rated Judge Kavanaugh unanimously well qualified to serve on the Supreme Court.  
      I'm going to tell you a little bit now how today's going to evolve. Each ABA witness will have five minutes to make an opening statement. We'll then have five-minute rounds of senators' questioning of the panel.  
      We will have three more panels after the ABA panel, where we will hear from 26 additional witnesses. We will have three more oh 26 additional witnesses. Many of these witnesses include the judge's former law clerks, students, friends and associates. They will help make the case that not only is Judge Kavanaugh one of the most qualified nominees that we have, Judge Kavanaugh is also an exceptional judge, teacher, coach, volunteer and dad. And I'm sure we'll hear that.  
GRASSLEY:  Now, I want to point out one person that's going to come on a later panel, because he has deep Iowa roots. I'm pleased and proud to hear from Professor Adam White. Grew up in Dubuque, Iowa. Graduated from Dubuque Wahlert High School, the University of Iowa, and Harvard Law School. And Adam's parents live in Bettendorf, Iowa. So he's probably not here yet, but I welcome Adam and I hope to meet his parents as well.  
      We will divide the time equally between the majority's 13 and the minority's 13 witnesses. Each witness has five minutes to make an opening statement, then five rounds for senator questioning of each of the three panels.  
      Our first panel today will feature two representatives from the ABA standing committee of the federal judiciary, Paul Moxley and John Tarpley.  
      I would like to have you folks stand also that I can swear you.  
      Do you swear that the testimony you're about to give before this committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth so help you God?  
      Before you give your testimony, a know a fine lawyer in Des Moines by the name of Mr. Brown who does a lot of what you're doing, and I know he spends a lot of time doing it and takes it very seriously. So let's did you two folks 
FEINSTEIN:  Don't I get to make a statement?  
GRASSLEY:  I'm sorry. You do get to make a statement. Hey, I apologize. Go ahead. You should make a statement.  
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you very much.  
      Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      I don't have any questions for the two panelists, but I want to thank them both for all the hard work the ABA does, not just on the evaluation of Judge Kavanaugh, but on your evaluation of all of the district and circuit court nominees that come before the committee.  
      I, in particular, pay special attention to the recommendation. And for me speaking personally, it is very important, and I want you to know that. And I believe I speak for members on my side as well.  
FEINSTEIN:  For decades, the American Bar has provided an analysis of judicial nominations to provide the Senate and the American public with an important assessment of a nominee's qualifications, so thank you.  
      The kind of rating it is, is, to some extent, what colleagues know of colleagues. And I think it's important, because we see one side of a person, but the ABA sees their professional side and hears about their professional side. And I think that's very important.  
      The rating is not determinative, and by no means is it the only consideration necessary to evaluate a nominee. It does provide the useful insight into whether the nominee has the legal competence, temperament and integrity to be elevated to the federal bench.  
      And I think it's critically important for the ABA to be allowed to follow its process and finish its work before a nominee has a hearing. And I know I am, Mr. Chairman, speaking for our side on that point. Because this enables the committee to ask questions of the nominee, especially if the ABA's evaluation suggests areas of concern in the nominee's record. So I hope we can return to such a progress a process.  
      Once again, thank you for your hard work, and welcome today.  
      Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you.  
      Mr. Moxley, do you want to start for your group?  
MOXLEY:  Happy to.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you.  
MOXLEY:  Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member Feinstein. We're honored to be here today representing our committee and explaining our evaluation of Judge Kavanaugh.  
      We gave him the highest rating possible, which is unanimously well-qualified.  
      For over 60 years, we have conducted thorough, nonpartisan, non-ideological peer review of nominees to the federal courts. We assess the nominees' integrity, professional competence and judicial temperament.  
      The standing committee does not propose, endorse or recommend nominees. We only evaluate the professional qualifications of a nominee to the courts.  
MOXLEY:  I am from Salt Lake City. John Tarpley, to my left, is from Nashville, Tennessee. And in the gallery is Bob Trout. And we are also assisted by Pam Bresnahan, who was the chair of this committee in July when the nomination came in.  
      To be a nominee to the Supreme Court, one must possess exceptional professional qualifications. As such, our investigation of a nominee is much more extensive than the other federal courts.  
      First, all the circuit members of the committee, which are 14, participate in the evaluation. Every federal circuit in the country is covered by these 14 people and not not just the circuit in which the nominee resides.  
      Second, while the standing committee independently reviews the writings of the nominee, we also commissioned three reading groups. In this instance, we had the University of Maryland, University of Utah and a professional group. And in this group of people were approximately 48 law professors and distinguished practitioners.  
      Members of the reading groups independently evaluated factors such as the judge's analytical abilities, the clarity of writing, knowledge of the law, application of the law to the facts, expertise in harmonizing a body of law, and the ability to communicate effectively.  
      We contacted and solicited input from almost 500 people who were likely to have knowledge of his qualifications, including federal and state judges, lawyers and bar representatives. Some of these people were identified in his Senate questionnaire which you're all so familiar with.  
      Also, our committee had a confidential evaluation performed on Judge Kavanaugh in the years 2003, 2005 and 2006, when he was nominated to the D.C. circuit court.  
      We also Mr. Tarpley, myself and Mr. Trout met with the judge for about three and a half hours in early August, and since then have talked to them regularly on the telephone, had e-mail exchanges and the like.  
      We concluded that his integrity, judicial temperament and professional competence met the highest standards for appointment to the court. Our rating of unanimously well-qualified reflects the consensus of his peers who have knowledge of his professional qualifications, and we reached out to a broad range of legal professionals, including almost 500 people, and we conducted about 120 personal interviews.  
      And with that, that concludes my opening statement.  
GRASSLEY:  Mr. Tarpley?  
TARPLEY:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Feinstein and members of the committee. Good morning.  
      I'm John Tarpley. As my colleague, Paul Moxley reported, I am the lead evaluator of the American Bar Association's investigation of Judge Kavanaugh's nomination to the United States Supreme Court.  
      It's my privilege to be here and it's my privilege to present this testimony on behalf of the committee's evaluation of Judge Kavanaugh's professional qualifications.  
TARPLEY:  Let me point out at the start, the standing committee did not consider Judge Kavanaugh's ideology, his political views or his political affiliation. It did not solicit information with regard to how Judge Kavanaugh might review on specific issues or cases that could come before the United States Supreme Court.  
      Rather, the ABA standing committee's evaluation of Judge Kavanaugh was based on a comprehensive, non-partisan, non-ideological peer review of integrity, professional competence and judicial temperament.  
      In evaluating integrity, the standing committee considers the nominee's character and general reputation in the legal community, his industry and his diligence.  
      The standing committee found that Judge Kavanaugh enjoys an excellent reputation for integrity and is a person of outstanding character. It was clear from all of our interviews and other lengthy conversations that he learned the importance of integrity from a very early age and throughout his life.  
      Importantly, many of the lawyers, judges and others interviewed praised his integrity. They said, "His integrity is absolutely unquestioned." "He is a person of the highest morality and the highest ethics." "He is what he seems:  very decent, humble and honest." Another said, "He always seeks to be fair. He is not result-oriented. He wants to do the right thing.  
      On the basis of our comprehensive evaluation process, the standing committee concluded that Judge Kavanaugh possesses the integrity for our highest rating, a unanimous well-qualified.  
      Professional competence. This encompasses qualities such as intellectual capacity, judgment, writing, analytical abilities, knowledge of the law and breadth of professional experience. A Supreme Court must possess all of these exceptional qualities. Judge Kavanaugh's professional competence easily exceeds these very high criteria.  
      One of the reading group members noted in reviewing his scholarly work, their view was that, "Judge Kavanaugh writes and analyzes the law and the application of the facts to law and that with exceptional clarity, and that his opinions are well organized, resulting in clear precedent." Another said, "Judge Kavanaugh is an excellent writer with a flair for making complicated facts very understandable."  
      Given the breadth, diversity and strength of the positive feedback we received from judges and lawyers from all parts of the profession, the committee would have been hard-pressed to come to any conclusion other than that Judge Kavanaugh has demonstrated exceptional professional competence. Those with whom he have has worked and those who have been involved in cases over which he has presided have applauded his intellectual acumen, his thoughtful discernment and his written clarity.  
      As a result, the ABA standing committee has determined that Judge Kavanaugh possesses sufficiently outstanding professional competence to be rated unanimously well-qualified.  
      In evaluating judicial temperament, the ABA standing committee considers a nominee's compassion, decisiveness, open-mindedness, courteousness, patience and freedom from bias.  
      Lawyers and judges overwhelmingly praised Judge Kavanaugh's judicial temperament. They said, among other things, "He is very straightforward," He maintains an open mind about all things," "He is an affable, nice person," "He is easy to get along with and even has a good sense of humor. Can you imagine that, a judge with a good sense of humor?" "He is really a decent person," "He has his temperament is terrific," "He is thoughtful, fair-minded always fair-minded in his questions to counsel."   
      Thus, our highest rating in this category.  
      In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I note that the ABA standing committee shares the goal of your committee:  to assure a qualified and independent judiciary for the American people.  
      On behalf of the ABA's more than 400,000 members from one end of the country to the other, I want to thank you for the opportunity to present this statement explaining our evaluation. We are a very diverse group of lawyers and we agreed unanimously that Judge Kavanaugh meets our high standards, and rated him as unanimously well-qualified to serve as an associate justice on the United States Supreme Court.  
      Thank you again for this opportunity. And thank you for your service.  
GRASSLEY:  questions of you. I'm going to start with Senator Graham, but before I do that I just want to thank you not only for your testimony, but you and your colleagues that did this review. We thank you very much for that part of your public service and your dedication to the rule of law.  
      Senator Graham and then Senator Feinstein?  
GRAHAM:  Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      That was an incredible explanation and overview of a well-lived life, do you agree with that?  
TARPLEY:  Absolutely.  
GRAHAM:  He sounds like a great judge, but a lousy politician.  
        
      He has no chance in my business.  
      What I would like to do is thank you, because very seldom do we have moments like this in modern politics where you pick people outside the realm of politics to give us some insight about a person like you have done.  
      Often not often, but sometimes we disagree with the ABA's rating from a Republican point of view. I am glad you do what you do. I want it to continue. When you reach a conclusion that I disagree with, it won't be because I don't respect your opinion.  
      From this committee's point of view, I think this is a valuable input. Some of us think you may be more left than right at times as an association, but that doesn't matter to me. What matters to me is the quality of your work, and I think you do the country a great service.  
      So just to sum sum up, intellect A+?  
TARPLEY:  Absolutely.  
GRAHAM:  You agree with that, Mr. Moxley?  
MOXLEY:  Yes.  
GRAHAM:  Integrity A+?  
MOXLEY:  A++.  
GRAHAM:  Again, we have nothing in common I don't with Judge Kavanaugh, so far as A++. I think I've got integrity, but I'm not going to I'm not going to put myself in the category of this man in terms of his ability to impress his peers.  
      Would you say he's mainstream in terms of being a judge?  
MOXLEY:  Absolutely. He's at the top of the stream.  
GRAHAM:  OK.  
        
      Have you ever heard the word "radical" used when it came to Judge Kavanaugh?  
TARPLEY:  No. Not in not in all of the evaluations that we've done. And we've communicated with more than a hundred lawyers and judges who work with him on a regular basis.  
GRAHAM:  If he's confirmed, do you think the court will be in good hands if he's a member of it?  
TARPLEY:  We gave him our our unanimously well-qualified rating. It's our highest rating. Absolutely.  
GRAHAM:  Do you agree with that, Mr. Moxley?  
MOXLEY:  Absolutely.  
GRAHAM:  Are either one of you running for president?  
TARPLEY:  Oh, no.  
        
      I'll save that job for you, Senator.  
        
GRAHAM:  Didn't work out.  
        
GRASSLEY:  Senator Feinstein?  
FEINSTEIN:  I have no questions, except to say that I think the report in writing is very helpful. I think the individuals' names that are down here who have participated in different aspects of it is very helpful. I think we have something that becomes part of the standing record.  
MOXLEY:  Yes.  
FEINSTEIN:  And there has been some controversy about the ABA, as you probably know. And I think the way to to really solve it are reports like this, which are thorough and contemplative and and helpful. So thank you.  
MOXLEY:  Thank you.  
GRAHAM:  We understood we needed to make a motion for the admission of the statement as well.  
GRASSLEY:  I just think it's automatically accepted because we always say, "You have five minutes and a longer written statement will be included."   
      Senator Cruz or go ahead, Senator Cruz.  
CRUZ:  I don't have any questions, but I want to briefly enter into the record 
GRASSLEY:  I should say that we do all this without objection. I don't hear any objections, so that the report is received.  
      Go ahead.  
CRUZ:  So, I want to briefly enter into the record a letter from the solicitors general of 12 states, including the state of Texas. These S.G.s have written in their personal capacities "to express our strong support for the confirmation of Judge Brett Kavanaugh."  
      They write, quote, "The solicitor general serves as a state's chief appellate litigator. Thus we represent our states in the U.S. Supreme Court, carefully study the work of the court, and have a keen appreciation for the role that the court plays in safeguarding the rule of law, including vital federalism and separation of powers principles. In our view, Judge Kavanaugh would make an outstanding addition to the nation's highest court. Throughout his distinguished career, Judge Kavanaugh has demonstrated unwavering commitment to preserving the rule of law and advancing the legal profession."  
      And so I'd like to enter this in the record.  
GRASSLEY:  Without objection, it will be received.  
      Senator Coons?  
COONS:  Let me just ask both of you one question, if I might.  
      Would it concern you if we proceeded to consider a nominee for a judicial post without taking into account the ABA's advice? Paul?  
MOXLEY:  Yes.  
TARPLEY:  You I'll just add to that. Paul knows that I'm the wordy one of this duo, but I will add to that.  
      Yes, I think it is it's an it's an incremental part of the process. It's an important part.  
      I'm a lawyer. I'm really interested in the kinds of judges that we have. All of our 410,000 law members bring a unique perspective to this process. Our individual committee members bring a unique, serious perspective to the process. It's valuable work we believe that we do and we think it's important for the process.  
MOXLEY:  What what I would add to that is that the thing that's hard to get your mind around is that if you have practitioners from a particular district or circuit and they're well-known to the courts, and you call the judges in your district or the lawyers in your district, they're going to be because they know you, they're going to be more honest and candid with you about it and since it's confidential. And part of our rule is that if someone brings up negative information about a nominee, unless we take that information back to the nominee for them to rebut it, we don't use it.  
      But it gives it gives the work that we do more authenticity. At least in our minds, it does. And, obviously, we're doing this on a pro bono basis and we think it's important or we wouldn't be doing it.  
COONS:  Thank you.  
MOXLEY:  We're interested we're interested in having good courts and we represent everyday people who are dependent on the courts.  
COONS:  I consult and rely on the ABA ratings when I'm considering district court, circuit court and, obviously, Supreme Court nominations. I appreciate your input, both on Justice Kavanaugh, but this is input that I look for every time we're doing confirmation hearing. And I think it's valuable and I think it ought to be part of a regular process.  
      I appreciate your appearing before us today.  
      Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
TARPLEY:  Thank you, Senator.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Crapo?  
CRAPO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I didn't have a question, but now I do.  
      I, too, appreciate deeply the work that the ABA does in the ratings and reviews that it gives all of our candidates. To me that's not the question that this committee has been struggling with. The question is whether the ABA, or anybody for that matter, should be given a blackball and be able to prohibit or ban a candidate from being considered by this committee if it doesn't give its approval.  
      What are your thoughts on that?  
MOXLEY:  Incidentally, one of your fellows from Idaho, is chair of this committee, Tim Hopkins.  
CRAPO:  A great attorney, great friend.  
MOXLEY:  Great great great lawyer and right man.  
      I don't think that we only see are part of the ball. And what we're familiar with is the competence of nominees, their integrity and their judicial temperament. You may have other considerations that aren't on our mind. And I don't think we blackball them, we just give our recommendations.  
CRAPO:  Mr. Tarpley?  
TARPLEY:  I agree with that.  
CRAPO:  Thank you very much. And thank you for your testimony here today, I appreciate it.  
TARPLEY:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Blumenthal?  
BLUMENTHAL:  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  
      I want to join in thanking you for your excellent work and the values that you uphold in this work, the highest traditions of our profession, which is advocacy for people regardless of their station in life, their status, their background, their race or religion.  
      And for that kind of advocacy to work, we need judicial independence, and I want to thank you for making that a specific criterion in your report.  
      And you remarked that you believe that Judge Kavanaugh would uphold judicial independence.  
      I hope that you join me in the very, very strong feeling that attacks by public officials and I'm not going to mince words by the president of the United States on an independent judiciary are a disservice to judicial independence and the integrity of our judicial system.  
TARPLEY:  I can respond quickly on that one, Paul.  
      The the ABA feels very strongly that a fair and independent judiciary is a linchpin of our society. The founding fathers set it up like that. It survived all these hundreds of years. And we feel very strongly about the fair and independent judiciary.  
MOXLEY:  What I would add to that is that a federal district court can declare an act an executive order as unconstitutional, enter injunctions. That's also true for legislative bills. And that's an integral part of our legal system, the federalism and the fact that each branch of government is coequal.  
BLUMENTHAL:  But attacks on the courts that undermine the faith and confidence of the public in the credibility of our courts are a real blow to judicial independence, are they not?  
MOXLEY:  I don't disagree with that.  
BLUMENTHAL:  I want to just note for the record that both of our guests seem to to be in agreement with.  
      And I thank you very much.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Senator Kennedy?  
KENNEDY:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      Gentlemen, thank you for being here. Do you have colleagues in the audience who worked with you on this effort?  
TARPLEY:  Certainly. We mentioned Bob Trout, a distinguished lawyer here in the District of Columbia, just immediately behind us, who was our local person on the ground who did a tremendous amount of work. And Denise Cardman, our staff representative from the American Bar Association. We're proud of both of them.  
KENNEDY:  Mr. Chairman, with your permission, may I ask the them to stand?  
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
      Would you please?  
KENNEDY:  I want to thank all of you for your hard work and your input.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you.  
KENNEDY:  Thank you for being here.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Whitehouse, do you have a question?  
WHITEHOUSE:  Sure.  
      Gentlemen, your evaluation of the nominee related to his qualifications and produced a conclusion that he was well-qualified?  
TARPLEY:  Unanimously well-qualified.  
WHITEHOUSE:  In the evaluation of the nominee's qualifications, did you have a chance to look at any patterns in his decisions on the court?  
TARPLEY:  We looked at a number of decisions. Our reading group examined every decision that he rendered. They read many of his writings.  
      To be candid, I did not see a pattern in his decisions. If there were a if there is a pattern to the decision, it's what we saw was an allegiance to the law, a dedication to looking at the facts of each particular case and applying the law to the facts of that case, and and a faithfulness to precedent.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Did you make any effort to cross-reference who the parties or entities were in these cases in that review?  
MOXLEY:  Yeah, I'll answer I'll answer that, Senator.  
      I'm not sure if you were here during the beginning part of our remarks 
WHITEHOUSE:  I wasn't.  
MOXLEY:  but we had we had three different reading groups who participated in this evaluation. And there were two different law schools that participated, University of Utah and University of Maryland. And then we had a practitioner's group, and this consisted of 48 people who wrote wrote the law in the different areas and gave us a report on on their 
WHITEHOUSE:  And in that 
MOXLEY:  opinions.  
WHITEHOUSE:  evaluation, did it take into account what amici, for instance, were appearing before the court?  
MOXLEY:  They didn't make us that appeared before the court. I mean that was a part of the record in every case.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Obviously, but was that part of your analysis?  
TARPLEY:  We we did not look at who the parties were to 
WHITEHOUSE:  Who the amici were.  
TARPLEY:  We looked we when the cases were read, it was considered as to who the parties were 
WHITEHOUSE:  Yeah.  
TARPLEY:  as well as who all the amicus curiae were.  
WHITEHOUSE:  But in terms of looking for any pattern, there was no cross-referencing between decisions and who amician parties were?  
MOXLEY:  Don't think so.  
WHITEHOUSE:  OK, just wanted to check.  
      Well, the reason I asked that question, to be totally upfront about it, is that as we showed earlier, when certain amici come before the D.C. Circuit amici who will tend to be associated with and funded by very powerful, very wealthy, right-wing interests they seem to have a better than 90 percent win rate in front of this particular judge.  
      And I know that he says that he makes decisions based only on the quality of the legal work and the argument before him, in which case it seems that these particular amici seem to have some very superhuman lawyering going their way, because a win rate above 90 percent to me is a bit of a signal that there may be something else going on to pursue.  
      Since you never looked at that underlying statistic, presumably you drew no conclusions about it.  
MOXLEY:  That's correct, but 
WHITEHOUSE:  OK, thank you.  
MOXLEY:  if if it'd be helpful to the Senator, we could have the reading groups look at that particular question.  
WHITEHOUSE:  I don't know that we'll have time, but I'll consider that. I'll get back to you.  
MOXLEY:  Thank you, Senator.  
GRASSLEY:  See I guess all of my colleagues have asked the questions they want to ask, so we thank you and we'll call the second panel.  
      Thank you very much.  
      
      
GRASSLEY:  Yeah. We'll we'll wait just a minute while people get the right names up here and then we'll have the second panel come.  
      Indicate to the audience that we have three more panels where we will hear 26 additional witnesses. Many of these witnesses include Judge Kavanaugh's former law clerks, students, friends and associates.  
      Our next panel includes the following 10 witnesses; five for the majority and five for the minority. We have Congressman Richmond, Mr. McCloud, Ms. Garza, Gary Weintraub, Olson, Ms. Baker, Ms. Sinzdak, Professor Murray and Professor Amar.  
      Let's see, I can I would ask if you would stand so I I should have said this before you sat down, I'm sorry.  
      Do do you swear that the testimony you're about to give before this committee will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God?  
      Thank you for your affirmation.  
      Now when the congressman comes, this will be his introduction. Cedric Richmond is the U.S. representative, 2nd District Louisiana. Currently serves as chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus.  
      Luke McCloud served as law clerk for Judge Kavanaugh, 13 and 14 years I mean 2013, 2014. He also served as law clerk for Niemeyer, U.S. Court of Appeals 4th, Justice Sotomayor Supreme Court, and he's an associate at Williams & Connolly.  
GRASSLEY:  Rochelle Garza serves as managing attorney of Garza & Garza Law, located in Brownsville, Texas.  
      Louisa Garry is a teacher at Friends Academy, Locust Valley, New York. She's known Judge Kavanaugh for 35 years.  
      Liz Weintraub is an advocate specialist at the Association University Centers on Disability, Silver Springs, Maryland. She previously served as a fellow in Senator Bob Casey's office.  
      Ted Olson is a partner of Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher. He served as solicitor general of the United States, 2001-2004, and was assistant attorney general in charge of the Office of Legal Counsel 1981 to '84. He's argued more than 60 cases before the Supreme Court.  
      Alicia Baker is a pastor of the Free Methodist Church in Indiana.  
      Colleen Roh Sinzdak is a senior associate of Hogan Lovells. She previously served as auditor for Chief Justice Roberts and Judge Garland on the D.C. Circuit. Ms. Sinzdak is a student of Judge Kavanaugh's Harvard Law School.   
      Professor Melissa Murray, professor of law at New York University School of Law. She previously served as a law professor at University California. Berkeley.  
      Professor Akhil Amar is Sterling Professor of Law and Political Science at Yale University, where he teaches constitution law in both Yale College and Yale Law School. After graduating from Yale Law School, the professor served as a law clerk to then-Judge Breyer on the U.S. Court of Appeals 1st Circuit. The professor taught Judge Kavanaugh when he was a student at Yale Law School.  
      So we'll start with you, Mr. McCloud.  
MCCLOUD:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Feinstein, members of the committee. I'm honored to speak with you today about my former boss and my current friend and mentor, Judge Kavanaugh.  
      I had the privilege of serving as one of Judge Kavanaugh's law clerks from 2013 to 2014. During that time I worked closely with the judge, day in, day out, helping him to prepare for arguments and draft opinions. I witnessed first-hand the judge's approach to deciding cases large and small. What I saw leaves no doubt that Judge Kavanaugh would make an outstanding Supreme Court Justice.  
Judge Kavanaugh is a fair-minded and independent jurist, regardless of the parties to the case or the issues being litigated. Judge Kavanaugh worked hard to understand every argument and perspective. There was always another opinion to read, another piece of the record to review, another angle to explore.  
      That was true even when a case turned on legal issues the judge knew well. He never looked for an easy answer or assumed that he had considered all of the relevant points. Judge Kavanaugh pushed himself to master every aspect of the cases he worked on and he expected his clerks to do the same.  
      To be sure, Judge Kavanaugh and I did not always see eye-to-eye on what the law required, but the judge did not want clerks who reflexively agreed with him or who never offered a contrary opinion. Just the opposite. Judge Kavanaugh has made a point of surrounding himself with a diverse group of law clerks diverse ideologically, diverse racially and from diverse backgrounds so that he can better understand all sides of a given issue.  
      I can vividly recall spending hours with my fellow clerks gathered around the judge's desk, debating the meaning of some statutory phrase or the best way to understand a precedent.  
      Invariably, the opinions that Judge Kavanaugh produced reflected his careful consideration of and respect for views other than his own.  
      Moreover, when we disagreed, I always knew that Judge Kavanaugh had come to his position honestly, based on a rigorous analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the arguments before him. There was no hidden agenda or partisan axe to grind, just the law, always the law.  
      These qualities have earned Judge Kavanaugh a sterling reputation for his work on the bench, but Judge Kavanaugh has also shown himself to be a leader when it comes to his work outside of chambers.  
      I especially admire Judge Kavanaugh's efforts as an advocate for those who were under-represented in the legal profession. He regularly speaks to diverse law student associations to encourage their members to apply for clerkships. The judge also actively mentors the minority students he teaches, helping them become future leaders within the law.  
Judge Kavanaugh's commitment to promoting the careers of minority attorneys is also apparent from his own clerk hiring. Of his 48 law clerks, 13 are racial minorities, including five African-Americans. These percentages are nearly unheard of amongst his peers.  
      Many of the judge's minority law clerks have gone on to clerk for the Supreme Court, something that is still all too uncommon in these days. I am fortunate to count myself among them, but I would not have even applied for that position had it not been for the support and encouragement of Judge Kavanaugh.  
      Again and again during the year I worked for him, Judge Kavanaugh showed himself to be a model of judicial excellence. But even more than his intelligence and his diligence, it is Judge Kavanaugh's character, his fundamental decency and kindness that inspired me then and continues to inspire me now.  
      Despite being one of the most prominent judges of his generation, Judge Kavanaugh remains humble and gracious. He is unfailingly polite to everyone he interacts with at the courthouse, from his colleagues on the bench to litigants to the court's professional staff.  
Judge Kavanaugh also volunteers regularly in his community and encourages all he knows to do the same.  
      He is, in short, a dedicated public servant in the truest sense of those words.  
      I will always be proud, incredibly proud, of the time I spent as Judge Kavanaugh's law clerk and I am prouder still today to support his confirmation to the Supreme Court.  
      Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:   
GARZA:  Good morning. Thank you for for the opportunity to testify in this hearing on the nomination of Judge Brett Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court of the United States.  
      My name is Rochelle Garza. I'm an attorney and managing member of Garza & Garza Law, PLLC in Brownsville, Texas, along with my brother-in-law partner Myles R. Garza.  
      My practice is focused on working with children, immigrants and victims of violence, including unaccompanied minor children, through the areas of immigration, family and criminal law.  
      I am proud to have been the guardian ad litem for the young woman known as Jane Doe, an unaccompanied immigrant minor who the Trump administration attempted to block from accessing abortion. And I am here today to talk about what this experience was like for Jane and the impact that Judge Kavanaugh's ruling had on her life.  
      Jane was 17 when she left her home in Central America, where she was physically abused by her parents, and traveled thousands of miles to seek safety.  
      In September of 2017, she arrived in the United States after a long and dangerous journey. As she later said, "My journey wasn't easy, but I came here with hope in my heart to build a life I can be proud of."  
      She was put into the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement and placed in a facility for immigrant children in the Rio Grande Valley. There Jane learned she was pregnant.  
      She immediately knew she did not wish to proceed with the pregnancy and expressed this to the facility staff. But as we were about to learn, Jane would face unprecedented obstruction by the Trump administration.  
      I will never forget meeting Jane for the first time. She was a petite 17-year-old. But as I quickly learned, no one should underestimate her. Her resolve was strong and she was very certain about her decision to terminate her pregnancy.  
      In Texas, minors seeking to terminate their pregnancies must obtain parental consent or a judicial bypass, which is an order from the court allowing the minor to consent to the procedure on her own. It was in that context that I was appointed Jane's guardian ad litem.  
      A state court granted her bypass, and we scheduled her appointments and confirmed the medical costs would be covered by a private source.  
      It was then that the government stepped in and ordered the facility to prevent her from going to her medical appointments.  
GARZA:  The way that Jane was treated was unbearable. Even after she made her decision, she was forced to undergo biassed counseling, including a medically unnecessary sonogram at an anti-abortion crisis pregnancy center.  
      As Jane later said, "People I don't even know are trying to make me change my mind. I made my decision and that is between me and God."  
      Against Jane's objections, they told her mother she was pregnant and wanted an abortion, and even though Jane disclosed that when her older sister became pregnant, her parents had beaten her until she miscarried. Jane was paced under constant surveillance and no longer allowed to leave on outings or exercise.  
      Despite all of this, Jane was strong. She was determined not to be forced to carry the pregnancy, the term against her will. So we fought back on her behalf.  
      We filed a lawsuit in Texas state court to require the facility to allow Jane to be transported. At the same time, the ACLU pursued a constitutional lawsuit in federal court in D.C. on my behalf as Jane's guardian ad litem.  
      Although the ACLU represents me, to be clear, I am testifying on my own behalf.  
      The ACLU obtained an emergency order from the district court to stop the government from blocking Jane's abortion, but the government appealed.  
Judge Kavanaugh issued an order giving the government 11 more days to find a sponsor for Jane, something they had already failed to do for the previous six weeks.  
      Furthermore, at the end of those 11 days, Judge Kavanaugh's order would not have granted Jane that Jane can finally get the care she needed. Rather she would have to start her case all over again and the government could appeal.  
      This could've taken weeks, and might have forced her to carry the pregnancy to term against her will, particularly because Texas bans abortion at 20 weeks and Jane was already 15 weeks pregnant.  
      The pain that this caused her is impossible to describe. Throughout her her ordeal, I saw her suffer. No politician or judge saw firsthand what she went through.  
      As she later said, "It has been credibly difficult for the to wait in the shelter for news of the judges in Washington, D.C., have given me permission to proceed with my decision."  
      Thankfully, the full appeals court overturned Judge Kavanaugh's decision. And I was with her when she had her abortion. I saw the relief that she experienced when she was able to realize the decision that she knew was right for her.  
      But at that point, Jane had been forced to remain pregnant against her will for an entire month and by the time from the time she obtained her judicial bypass.  
      I am and will always be in awe of Jane, and she possessed a profound strength of character. She believed that no other girl should have to go through what she went through. And as she said, "No one should be shamed for making the right decision for themselves."  
      I can think of nothing more human or more American than what I saw in Jane. Knowing that she is now pursuing the life she hoped for gives me great pride.  
      She may had been petite, but she ignited change. And just like she said, "This is my life, my decision." It was an honor to represent her and to be by her side and to witness true perseverance, and to share her story with this committee today.  
      Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Ms. Garry?  
GARRY:  Chairman Grassley and Ranking Member Feinstein, my name is Louisa Garry. I'm a high school teacher and coach, so it is unusual for me to not be in the classroom with my students on the first Friday after Labor Day. But I'm honored to be here to voice my support of my college classmate and longtime friend.  
      I met Brett Kavanaugh in 1983, almost exactly 35 years ago today. We were both incoming freshmen at Yale. Brett was standing under a tent with his parents, waiting to depart for the freshmen outdoor orientation.  
      I grew up in a small town in Ohio, and was a custom to saying hello to everyone, so I walked up and introduced myself. Brett warmly received my greeting and thus began a friendship that continues to this day.  
      Our enduring friendship might surprise some because in certain ways we are quite different. I have been teaching and coaching high school students for the last 30 years, while Brett pursued a high-profile career in law.  
      Brett comes from a Catholic upbringing in a city, and tends to have a conservative outlook, while I would describe myself as a moderate Quaker who seeks out running trails and ocean beaches.  
      Our differences have allowed us to learn from each other and see things from a different perspective. We've maintained a close friendship based on our mutual respect, support and trust.  
      One of the things Brett and I do have in common is an appreciation for competitive sports. We both have daughters, and we often talk about the benefits of youth sports in raising strong, independent girls and women with confident voices.  
      Brett and I not only watch a lot of sports, we also run together. We first started running together while Brett was in his first year of Yale Law School, and I was working at Yale and training to compete in the 1988 U.S. Olympic trials for track.  
      Brett was not much of a runner, but he could keep up with me on an easy warm-up. After he ran his first three-mile race, Brett announced that we wanted to run the Boston Marathon in his third year of law school. He asked me to promise to train and to run it with him, and I agreed.  
      Even though I was a competitive runner, I had never run anything close to a marathon in distance. But Brett's faith and my ability as a runner and coach gave me confidence to take on this challenge.  
      During the marathon, Brett waited for me through water stops and bathroom breaks just as I waited for him through leg crams and blisters. We ran together, step for step, for 26.2 miles and crossed the finish line at exactly the same time.  
      We ran the Boston Marathon together again, step for step, two more times, in 2010 and most recently in 2015 in celebration of our 50th birthdays.  
      Four hours is a long time to spend with someone as you physically and mentally struggle through the miles. But I was lucky to go through it with Brett, whose humor, fortitude and idealism elevates those around him.  
      Brett and I share an interest in the growth and development of young people. Many people have heard about Brett's basketball coaching expertise, but I believe even more students have benefited from taking a class with Brett at Harvard, Yale or Georgetown.  
      Brett is a bright, articulate and engaging educator. And he is generous with the time and attention he devotes to mentoring others.  
      In November 2016, Brett welcomed juniors from my school to the federal court for a field trip to learn about the judicial system. As we prepared for the visit, my students wanted to know, "Is Judge Kavanaugh conservative or liberal?" I responded that they should wait and determine the answer on their own.  
      Brett spent over an hour with my class explaining his role as a judge, discussing current issues facing the federal court of appeals, answering the student's questions and listening to their voices. He spoke passionately about his belief in the judicial system, and the importance of the separation of powers in government.  
      As we left the federal court, a couple of students immediately remarked, "We couldn't tell. Is he conservative or liberal? Can you tell us?" I responded, "That's how it's supposed to be. The judiciary is supposed to be independent."  
      Brett has a wide circle of friends of diverse political view points, and often shows a willingness to step in to potentially uncomfortable forums with a spirit of collegiality.  
      At our 30th college reunion, Brett joined a panel on free speech. The panel broadly represented the diverse perspectives of our classmates, and each of the panel members spoke respectfully about the challenges faced by universities in addressing issues of free speech.  
      When discussing how to balance a wide range of opinions, Brett quoted the character Atticus Finch from the book "To Kill a Mockingbird," and emphasized how important it is to, quote, "stand in a person's shoes."  
      Brett doesn't just speak words of empathy and tolerance; he listens and acts upon these words. His friends and colleagues describe him as a kind, thoughtful person and a good listener.  
      I leave it to others to speak to Brett's judicial record. I am here to speak to his outstanding qualities personal qualities as a life-long friend. Brett Kavanaugh will be a voice of fairness and integrity as a justice of the Supreme Court.  
GARRY:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Ms. Garry.  
      Now Ms. Weintraub.  
WEINTRAUB:  Thank you, Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Feinstein and the members of the committee for believing that I have something important to say about Judge Kavanaugh.  
      51 years ago, I was born with cerebral palsy and an intellectual disability. I entered a world that had low expectations for me and people like me. Judge Kavanaugh mentioned that he has the same low expectation, and I am here to tell you that he's wrong.  
      I have achieved more than many thought possible for someone like me. I work full-time as a professional "Tuesdays with Liz," a weekly YouTube series where I talk to people about policy in a way that people with intellectual disability can understand. You're all invited to be my guests on "Tuesdays with Liz."  
      Today I live with my husband who also happens to have a disability, and to together we make our own decisions. It has not always been this way.   
      In my 20s, some professionals and my parents decided to put me into a private institution. My parents love me, but instead of treating me like an adult with opinions and preferences and asking what I wanted, they made the decision for me like I was a child. This was wrong.  
      In the, there's a saying that we hold very dear to our heart and that's "Nothing about us without us." This means that any decision that affects us should include us. We expect to be part of the conversation, even to lead the conversation. Self-determination is a basic human right for all people with disabilities. People with intellectual disabilities have opinions and preferences and they should be recognized.  
Judge Kavanaugh's nomination matters to me. the Does v. D.C. case made me very upset, because Judge Kavanaugh's decision did not respect people's rights and their freedom of choice. This is wrong.  
      The lower court in Does told the D.C. government it needed to ask people with intellectual disabilities if they want treatment. That requirement was people with disabilities.  
Judge Kavanaugh had a chance to stand up for the rights of the women and the kids, but he failed. He said that the D.C. government did not even need to ask them what they wanted, but could decide for them what was going to happen to their bodies.  
      Would it have been too hard to ask ask them what they wanted? Any adult deserves to be treated like a grown-up and have the right to be asked what they wanted, especially when it's about their own body. If they needed support to if they need support to understand and make an informed choice, then give it to them.  
      Our country is founded on liberty and justice for all, and all means all. I worry about a Supreme Court justice who doesn't believe that we, as people with intellectual disabilities, can make decisions for ourselves. If Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed, I'm afraid that my right to make decisions for myself will be taken away.  
      I ask you, for myself and my community, when you vote on Judge Kavanaugh, please do not vote to turn the clock back and take the rights that I and others have fought for.  
      Thank you very much.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Ms. Ms. Weintraub.  
      I assume that, if you're like everybody in the House of Representatives, you're always busy and you'd like to go you that's why you're probably on first. So I think I'll go to Congressman Richmond to welcome.  
      I I previously had introduced you as a congressman and chair of the Black Caucus.  
RICHMOND:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And we did have pending votes, so I want to thank you for the courtesy and and apologize for being late. And I want to thank the ranking member, Senator Feinstein, for being here.  
      Earlier this week, a senator argued that or stated that, "It's not the U.S. Supreme Court that's supposed to fix this country culturally, economically, socially, spiritually. Courts should not try to fix problems that are within the province of the U.S. Congress, even if the U.S. Congress does not have the courage to address those problems. Our courts were not meant to decide these kinds of issues."  
      That logic would mean that African-Americans wouldn't be able to attend integrated schools, buy a home previously owned by a white person, or lodge at certain hotels. In many cases, the high court has acted when Congress has neither the courage nor the will to act.  
      For nearly eight decades, African-Americans have fought to secure historic legal victories that have significantly bent the moral arc of the universe towards justice, even at times when progress felt incremental. Nonetheless we know that reversing meaningful progress for decades to come would be profoundly devastating and an affront to all who courageously fought on the front lines, some of whom I currently representative as chair of the Congressional Black Caucus.  
      President Trump has seized on this opportunity to pack the court by selecting judicial nominees who lack pragmatism and are often strikingly unqualified and proven intolerant bigots.  
      We're in the midst of a fundamental shift towards nominees that embrace ideology at the fringes of mainstream legal thought. The current administration has nominated, and with the help of Senate Republicans has confirmed, a range of nominees whose confirmation hearings portend a precarious legal fate for communities of color moving forward.  
      Mr. Kavanaugh's confirmation will fortify a generation of destructive conservative ideology at a time when several historically significant legal challenges will come before the high court.  
      As members of the CBC, we cannot overstate what is at stake for African-Americans and communities of color across the nation.  
RICHMOND:  Judge Kavanaugh, who relies heavily on the same textualist reading of the Constitution employed by former Justice Scalia, possesses a conservative judicial record that leads us to believe that voting rights, education, criminal law outcomes will be greatly endangered in the coming years.  
      A careful, in-depth evaluation of his record, which has largely been shrouded in secrecy and withheld from public examination, uncovers writings that illustrate sparse commitment to equal protection under the law. Additionally, Judge Kavanaugh's lack of deference to precedent is staggering and inconsistent with other conservative judges who currently preside on the D.C. Circuit Court with him.  
      A judge who frequently questions key legal precedents represents a grave danger to many legal frameworks that have advanced the African-American community. Voting rights, from Ohio to Wisconsin to Georgia, the vestiges of Jim Crow have resurfaced under a new cloak, unchecked and unabated. While these states are no long longer conducting literacy tests, the effects of their new policies have been implemented with staggering precision and efficiency.  
      By a 5-4 vote more than five years ago, the court struck down Section 4 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, making Section 5 of the law essentially unworkable. The decision has precipitated a myriad of voter suppression efforts across the country.  
      Most recently, the Randolph County Board of Elections and Registration in Georgia inexplicably considered a proposal calling for the closure of more than three-quarters of the polling locations in in the 60 percent black county, including one location that is 97 percent African-American.  
      Despite the eventual rejection of this ill-fated proposal, the federal government never bothered to intervene and fulfill its statutory obligated responsibilities. Simply put, there's no longer any active federal mechanism dedicated to oversight and safeguarding an individual's constitutionally protected right to vote.  
      As I told you in January of 2017, Jeff Sessions' record on civil rights is questionable and one that shows he does not care about enforcing civil rights. It is when this it is within this context that we have grave concerns about Judge Kavanaugh's opinion in the 2012 case of State of South Carolina v. Holden. In 2011, under the fully viable Voting Rights Act of 1965, the Obama administration blocked enforcement of South Carolina's state-issued photo ID law because it affected up to eight percent of black South Carolinians.  
      In his ruling to uphold the law, Mr. Kavanaugh claimed it does not have the effects that some expected and some feared. Not only is this statement inexplicably tone deaf, it is also inconsistent with reality. These same real life consequences reverberate to other elements of everyday life for black families.  
      On criminal justice, Judge Kavanaugh's record on criminal justice is entirely unsatisfactory for a country persistently struggling to hold law enforcement accountable for mass incarceration and police brutality. He has expressed a desire to overturn precedent that protects civilians from officers engaging in activities inconsistent with the Fourth Amendment.  
      He suggested that probable cause standards should be more flexible, which would expose more African-Americans to failed policies police tactics like stop and frisk. Additionally, Judge Kavanaugh's support for narrowing individuals Miranda Rights would hurt people of color who are disproportionately subject to excessive law enforcement engagement in their respective communities.  
      And the lastly, affirmative action. Mr. Kavanaugh's record on affirmative action is particularly disturbing and ripe for intense scrutiny. Almost 20 years ago, while in private practice, he wrote that in the future the Supreme Court would agree that in the eyes of government we are just one race. Given the Department of Justice's recent investigation into Harvard University's admission practices, we're deeply troubled by the increased likelihood this will come before the Supreme Court in short order.  
      With that, Mr. Chairman, I will submit the rest of my testimony for the record, but I would just conclude by saying that with the cloud of criminality and lack of transparency, the Congressional Black Caucus, which is 48 members, we represent 78 million Americans, and I just want to say for the record, of those 78 million only 17 million are African-American.  
      We represent a vast variety of people, and we represent a collective conscience of this country, black, white, in the spirit of Goodman, Chaney and Schwerner, who gave their life to make this country a more perfect union and to fight for civil rights and to fight for civil justice. And it is in within that spirit that we have grave concerns and oppose the nomination of Justice Kavanaugh.  
      And thank you for your time, and I know I went over.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you very much, Congressman.  
      Now, we go to Mr. Olson.  
OLSON:  Thank 

        
OLSON:  Thank you, Mr. Chair Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Feinstein, and members of this committee.  

OLSON:  I have had the privilege of practicing law throughout the United States for over 50 years in state and federal appellate courts, and 63 times before the United States Supreme Court. I have argued to 20 different Supreme Court Justices appointed by 11 presidents, from President Eisenhower to President Trump, one-fifth of our nation's justices appointed by one-fourth of our presidents.  
      My experience has given me first-hand exposure to justices numerous presidents have selected for the Supreme Court, the qualities that these justices have exemplified, and the standards they have established for themselves and for their successors. Each of these justices has manifested the highest professional and jurisprudential standards, the qualities we expect in justices appointed by presidents of any political party.  
      I have won and lost my share of decisions from justices appointed by presidents of every political background. I can say that in every case, my clients and arguments were received with respect, understanding, and great care. Americans are rightly proud of the Supreme Court and its justices the envy of the world.  
      I will elaborate on five of the characteristics that I have seen in Supreme Court Justices.  
      First, intelligence and learning. A justice on the Supreme Court must understand the Constitution, the separation of powers, the Bill of Rights, the role of each of the three branches of government and federal laws ranging from antitrust and patents, to criminal procedure, and the environment and I could go on and on. The court decides 75 cases each year involving an awesome range of complex subjects, demanding from each justice an extraordinary breadth of understanding, experience, erudition, judgment and insight.  
      Secondly, respect for precedent and judicial tradition. The justices before whom I have appeared have uniformly manifested abiding respect for the role of the judiciary, and past decisions of the court.  
OLSON:  Not every precedent is inviolate, of course. As Justice Breyer has explained in his book "Making Democracy Work," the court has occasionally been mistaken or wrong, but its errors have generally been corrected over time.  
      The justices are mindful of the importance of stare decisis, and the public's reliance on past decisions, but within the context of overarching fealty to the meaning and intent of the Constitution and the rule of law.  
      Third, open-mindedness and independence. Justices, of course, have their individual histories, predilections and past writings, but each justice must examine every case on the merits, carefully reviews precedents, briefs and oral arguments and the views of their colleagues, and only then come to a decision.  

        
OLSON:  Any other approach 

OLSON:  Any other approach would, as Justice Ginsburg has explained 

OLSON:  display disdain for the entire judicial process.  
      Fourth, integrity. The justices of our Supreme Court, like our judicially judiciary in general reflect rock solid integrity. We may strongly disagree with the court's decisions from time to time, but no credible critic would suggest that the court's decisions are corrupt or dishonest. Our citizens respect and obey even very unpopular decisions, because they believe in the integrity of the judicial process and the honesty of our justices.  
      Fifth, temperament. An open mind and respectful temperament and collegiality are vital to the Supreme Court, and the justices before whom I have appeared uniformly listened to and probed often intensely the arguments presented to them. But however strongly they have disagreed in a particular case, they have remained respectful, warm and gracious to their colleagues and to the advocates who appeared before them.  
      I have known Judge Kavanaugh for two decades. I know from personal observations and experience that he possesses 
        

OLSON:  and has consistently exemplified 

OLSON:  the qualities that I have described.  

OLSON:  He received an outstanding education 

OLSON:  in one of the nation's finest law schools, he's clerked for extraordinary jurists including the justice he is being nominated to replace, taught constitutional law at Harvard Law School, served in the Executive Branch and in private practice, and for 12 years at the highest level of the federal appellate judiciary. He is thoughtful, gracious, open-minded, respected by his peers and widely praised by the lawyers who appeared before him.  
      Our system contemplates that justices will be appointed by presidents of either party. As lawyers who appear before the court and as Americans who must live with the court's decisions, we cannot expect that our cases will be decided by jurists who always agree with our positions.  
      But we can aspire to a judiciary that will be prepared, perceptive, competent, open-minded open-minded, honest and respectful. That is the jurist that is Brett Kavanaugh; he is the kind of person and judge that we expect and deserve on the Supreme Court.  
      I hope you will confirm his appointment to this court.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Mr. Olson.  
      Now, Ms. Baker?  
BAKER:  Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee. My name is Alicia Wilson Baker; I am a pro-life Christian and ordained minister from Indiana. I am someone who was denied the birth control I needed because of my insurance company's religious beliefs, and I'm honored to be here today truly honored to speak on behalf of every day women.  
      If Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed to the Supreme Court, I fear that many women especially those who can least afford it will not get access to affordable birth control because of their employer's religious beliefs. Birth control allows women and people to control their lives, and without it, women's health and their futures are at risk.  
      I'd like to tell you about my background. I grew up in a devout Christian family in California. My parents were leaders in our church congregation. My childhood is filled with happy memories of attending church, learning how to put faith into action through mission trips and serving our community.  
      I decided to go to seminary and become an ordained minister so that I can serve others. I currently work at a local neighborhood center in urban Indianapolis, where I collaborate with local agencies and neighbors to improve the quality of life in our neighborhood.  
      In 2015, I met and fell in love with my best friend, Josh, who is here with me today. Like me, Josh is also a Christian who believes that faith is a verb is about how we live our lives. And like me, Josh had decided to wait until marriage to have sex.  
      Once we got engaged, we knew we would not be ready to have children right away, so we started researching birth control options. Josh and I were on a tight budget as we struggled to pay off our student loans and save for a home. We were relieved that the Affordable Care Act requires health plans to cover birth control at no additional cost to us. On my doctor's advice, I decided to get an IUD, but what I got was a nightmare and a $1,200 bill.  
      It turned out my insurance company had a religious objection to covering my birth control. Nothing in our faith disapproves of birth control. We were making prudent and responsible decisions for our family, but our beliefs and our decisions were overridden by the religious beliefs of an insurance company.  
      In the days leading up to our wedding and for several months after, I was fighting with my insurance company, sending appeal after appeal. In the end, Josh and I scrounged together the money, but we had to use the money we had set aside to pay off our student loans and buy our first home together.  
      I still feel a pit in my stomach when I remember the stress and anxiety that we went through just as we were starting our new life together, but I know I am fortunate. I was ultimately able to pay that bill. But what happens to those who cannot pay for their birth control?  
      What happens to those who face an impossible choice between getting the health care they need and putting food on the table, or paying for child care or staying in school. If Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed to the Supreme Court, access to affordable birth control will be in jeopardy.  
      Just three years ago, Judge Kavanaugh heard a case which is about something similar to what Josh and I had experienced. In that case, Judge Kavanaugh would have allowed employers and universities to use religion to deny birth control coverage to individuals.  
      If Judge Kavanaugh had his way, courts would give free rein to those who claim their religious beliefs override the law. As a Christian, I am against such broad interpretations of religious freedom. It is not right that employers may be allowed to use religion to avoid following the laws of the land.  
      I fear that some will use this reasoning not to protect religion, but as a way to discriminate. I shudder to imagine what this means to real people, for the communities I work with every day. At this critical moment when so much is on the line for women and their family, my faith guides me.  
BAKER:  Proverbs 31:8-9 says, "Speak out for those who cannot speak, for the rights of all the destitute. Speak out, judge righteously, defend the rights of the poor and needy."  
      As a person of deep faith, I would never impose my religious beliefs on anyone and no one else should either. My religious beliefs are separate from the law and that's how it should be. But Judge Kavanaugh's record shows he does not respect this critical separation.  
      This committee and the Senate must weigh the harmful impact that Judge Kavanaugh would have on the health and well-being of so many people. I urge this committee to block his nomination to the Supreme Court.  
      Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Ms. Baker.  
      Now Ms. Sinzdak.  
ROH SINZDAK:  Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Feinstein and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to address the committee about my former Harvard Law school professor, Judge Kavanaugh.  
      I took Judge Kavanaugh's separation-of-powers class in the winter term of 2009. In the years since, he has served as a trusted mentor to me. My experience as Judge Kavanaugh's student and mentee has led me to offer my firm support of his nomination to the Supreme Court of the United States.  
      In some ways my support for Judge Kavanaugh is unsurprising. A recent New York Times article cataloged the exceptionally strong reviews that Judge Kavanaugh's students have given to his teaching. Over the years, students' anonymous feedback forms have consistently lauded the judge as an outstanding professor, one who strives to present a balanced view of the material in class and who makes himself uniquely accessible to students outside of the classroom. I wholeheartedly agree with that phrase.  
      Multiple articles have also detailed Judge Kavanaugh's role as a mentor and sponsor for young lawyers many of them females and minorities. You have heard about Judge Kavanaugh's impressive record of hiring women and diverse law clerks. But Judge Kavanaugh's efforts as a mentor are not limited to his clerks. He also works to maintain connections with countless law students and young lawyers across the country.  
Judge Kavanaugh is an invaluable resource and advocate for those starting out in the profession and a champion of diversity in the legal world.  
      Ever since I took his class, he has been a mentor and a sponsor, offering friendly advice, helpful support and a listening ear as I've navigated the stages of my legal career. When I was considering applying for a Supreme Court clerkship, Judge Kavanaugh generously offered his advice and support, helping me to obtain a clerkship with Chief Justice Roberts. And when I went back to work after having my first child, a lunch with Judge Kavanaugh helped bolster my enthusiasm for my legal career.  
      In other ways, however, my support for Judge Kavanaugh may strike some as surprising. I am a registered Democrat, and from 2010 to 2011 I had the great honor of serving as a law clerk for then-judge, now chief judge, Merrick Garland on the D.C. Circuit. In that role, I experienced firsthand what a brilliant, fair and kind jurist he is.  
      I believe the judiciary and the country as a whole has suffered greatly from the failure to confirm Chief Judge Garland to the Supreme Court.  
      I nonetheless support Judge Kavanaugh's confirmation. In my view, preserving and protecting the integrity of the judiciary means supporting and confirming highly qualified judicial nominees regardless of whether one agrees with the politics of the party that nominated them.  
      In my experience, Judge Kavanaugh has the traits that make him eminently qualified to serve as a justice on the United States Supreme Court. His impressive intellect is obvious, but the judge is also open-minded, he is principled, and he is evenhanded. I'd like to speak a little more about each of those qualities.  
      First, in my interactions with Judge Kavanaugh, he has always demonstrated open-mindedness and intellectual integrity.  
      When I think back on the judge's separation-of-powers class, it isn't his lectures I remember, it is his insightful questions and the classroom debates they sparked. The course touched on some of the most important issues in our constitutional democracy, but rather than telling us what to think about them the judge asked questions that enabled us to develop our own views and share them with the class.  
      More than that, he seemed genuinely interested in hearing our varying perspectives. One of my favorite law school memories is engaging in a fierce debate with a separation-of-powers classmate over whether INS v. Chada was correctly decided. Judge Kavanaugh seemed delighted to hear both sides and he encouraged us to develop our conflicting views. With Judge Kavanaugh I was confident that if I could make the right argument he would accept my position.  
      My belief in Judge Kavanaugh's open-mindedness has deepened over the years through my one-on-one conversations with him. I often can't resist sharing my views on separation-of-powers issues, and he is invariably an engaged listener and an insightful questioner despite the fact that we come from different sides of the political aisle.  
      Second, in my experience, Judge Kavanaugh is highly principled. By that I mean something very specific:  He carefully delineates the difference between policy preferences and what the law demands.  
      In the separation-of-powers class we often discussed current events and the way they implicated various constitutional concerns. Policy considerations inevitably came up and we certainly discussed those, but the judge would repeatedly remind us that those policy concerns are beside the point if the Constitution dictates a different outcome.  
      More generally, the judge taught us that the way to discern the legal principles that undergird our democratic system is to look to the text, history and precedents regarding the Constitution, not our policy preferences.  
      Third, Judge Kavanaugh is evenhanded and treats people fairly and with respect.  
      In class he gave the same consideration to the views of all students. I consistently felt he was judging our answers based on our ability to reason clearly and support our points, not based on any political or ideological standard.  
Judge Kavanaugh's evenhandedness goes beyond respect for varying ideologies. In my experience, he treats everyone equitably regardless of their gender, race or background. One would think, or at least hope, that in 2018 that should not be remarkable, but as a woman, I know that explicit and implicit bias continue to plague the legal profession just as they plague the rest of society.  
      Far too often in my career I have felt that I was being treated as a female lawyer rather than just as a lawyer. But with Judge Kavanaugh I have never felt that way. In my interactions with him I know that I am being judged on the merits of what I say:  nothing less and nothing more.  
ROH SINZDAK:  I believe that a person with such sterling credentials and experience as a judge, who so clearly values integrity, principle and fairness, is eminently qualified to serve on the Supreme Court. I therefore enthusiastically support Judge Kavanaugh's nomination.  
      Thank you for your time.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you very much.  
      Now Professor Murray.  
MURRAY:  Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Feinstein, thank you so much for the opportunity to appear at these hearings on the confirmation of Judge Brett Kavanaugh to the United States Supreme Court.  
      My name is Melissa Murray and I am a professor of law at New York University School of Law, where I teach constitutional law, family law and reproductive rights and justice, and serve as the faculty co-director of the Birnbaum Women's Leadership Network.  
      Prior to my appointment at New York University, I was the Alexander F. and May T. Morrison Professor of Law at the University of California-Berkeley, where I taught for 12 years, served as faculty director of the Berkeley Center on Reproductive Rights and Justice, and served as interim dean of the law school. Like Judge Kavanaugh, I too am a graduate of Yale Law School.  
      Over the course of these hearings, much has been made of Judge Kavanaugh's warmth and kindness towards his clerks and those in his community. These accounts resonate with me, as Judge Kavanaugh and I have traveled in similar professional circles over the years. In fact, I too have had lunch with him and I can attest to his friendliness and charming demeanor.  
      But this nomination is not about whom I would befriend or with whom I would have lunch. It is not about how Brett Kavanaugh treats a handful of women from elite institutions. It is about real people on the ground people like the women to my right and the people they represent, who will not have lunch with Judge Kavanaugh, who will not meet with Judge Kavanaugh, but who will nonetheless depend on Judge Kavanaugh to protect their constitutional rights to make decisions about their lives.  
      As you've heard from women like Alicia Baker and Liz Weintraub, confirming Judge Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court would threaten people's ability to make fundamental personal decisions including deciding whether to have an abortion.  
      Reproductive rights are under serious threat in this country. What we have seen over the last two decades is a concerted strategy that would dismantle Roe v. Wade piecemeal not in one fell swoop, but rather through a death by a thousand cuts. This nomination is the culmination of that decades-long effort to destroy Roe v. Wade incrementally without necessarily formally overruling it.  
      The Supreme Court stands as a bulwark against this assault on reproductive freedom. Just two years ago, in Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt, Justice Kennedy joined a majority to reaffirm the undue burden standard first articulated in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, thereby reaffirming the court's commitment to protecting reproductive rights. But Judge Kavanaugh's nomination to replace Justice Kennedy imperils the court's ability to continue to hold the line on reproductive freedom.  
      In Garza v. Hargan the only abortion case to come before him Judge Kavanaugh voted to block a young immigrant woman from receiving abortion care, and insisted that she remain pregnant against her wishes weeks after she had made her decision and after she had completed all of the state-imposed requirements.  
      Although he claimed to follow Supreme Court precedent in Garza, Judge Kavanaugh's opinions evinced a crabbed and skeptical view of these precedents a view that is completely out of step with the high court's own view of those cases. Despite his claims during these confirmation hearings that he was respecting Supreme Court precedent on minors and abortion, in fact, his dissent shows the opposite.  
      He ignored the Supreme Court's holding in 1979's Bellotti v. Baird that allows minors to complete a confidential judicial bypass in lieu of parental or guardian consent. Jane Doe had already met the Texas requirement of a judicial bypass by the time her case came before Judge Kavanaugh, so further delay to seek a sponsor was wholly unwarranted.  
      Further, Judge Kavanaugh did not explain how the government's flat prohibition wholly preventing Jane Doe from accessing abortion failed to constitute an undue burden under Casey or a pre-viability ban under Roe, nor did he weigh the potential harms to Jane Doe stemming from a further delay against the purported benefits of that delay, as is required by Whole Woman's Health.  
Judge Kavanaugh's record in Garza suggests that rather than respecting precedent, he will undermine or ignore it. And in so doing, he will provide the necessary fifth vote that would utterly eviscerate the right to abortion.  
      During these hearings, when asked by you, Senator Feinstein, whether he agreed with the statement that, "a woman's right to control her reproductive life impacts her ability to participate equally in the economic and social life of the nation," Judge Kavanaugh's reply was not, "I agree."  
      Instead he said, "I understand the importance of the precedent set forth in Roe v. Wade." We have seen this before. In 2005, then-Judge Roberts came before this committee and stated that Roe is the settled law of the land during his own confirmation process.  
      Despite this earnest declaration, as a justice he voted to uphold a statutory scheme that would have shuttered 75 percent of the clinics in Texas. If this is what it looks like to respect precedent and treat Roe as settled law, then these are empty promises.  
      Since 2011, politicians have passed over 400 new laws in 33 states across the nation that shame, pressure and punish women who decide to have an abortion. Some of these laws would ban abortion as early as six weeks, before a woman may even know that she is pregnant. Others would require doctors to convey a falsehood to patients, telling them that abortion leads to breast cancer.  
      The point of these restrictions is to make it difficult, costly and in some cases impossible for women to obtain an abortion, and as such, these restrictions impede women's ability to participate equally in the social and economic life of the nation. And these restrictions are especially detrimental to young women, women struggling to make ends meet, women of color, immigrant women, rural women and women who have already had children. In practice, these restrictions mean that Roe is merely a hollow promise and not a reality for many women.  
      To be clear, Roe v. Wade is not a decision invented by activist judges; it is part of a century's worth of jurisprudence that protects an entire constellation of rights rights relating to family, marriage, parenthood, contraception and personal autonomy in intimate life.  
      A vote against Roe is whether to overrule it as a formal matter or gut it through incremental cuts puts all of those rights in jeopardy. And make no mistake about it, a vote for Judge Kavanaugh is a vote against Roe.  
      Thank you for having me.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Professor Murray.  
      Now Professor Amar.  
AMAR:  Thank you, Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Feinstein, distinguished senators.  
      My name is Akhil Amar. I'm the Sterling Professor of Law and Political Science at Yale University, where I specialize in constitutional law. I've previously testified before this committee on seven occasions, and it's always a solemn responsibility to appear here.  
      Here are my top 10 points.  
      Point one:  Brett Kavanaugh is the best candidate on the horizon. The Supreme Court's biggest job is to interpret and apply the Constitution. Kavanaugh has studied the Constitution with more care, consistency, range, scholarliness and thoughtfulness than any other sitting Republican federal judge under age 60.  
AMAR:  He's the best choice from the long list of 25 potential nominees publicly circulated by President Trump. I say this as a constitutional scholar who voted for Hillary Clinton and strongly supported every Supreme Court nomination by Democratic presidents in my adult lifetime.  
      Point two, originalism is wise and non-partisan. Studying the Constitution requires diligence and intelligence, especially for those like Kavanaugh who are originalists, paying special heed to what the Constitution's words originally meant when adopted.  
      I, too, am an originalist. In prioritizing the Constitution's text, history and structure to discern its principles and distill its wisdom, we originalists are following in the footsteps of George Washington, Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, John Marshall, Joseph Story and Abraham Lincoln among others.  
      Originalism is neither partisan nor outlandish. The most important originalist of the last century was a towering liberal Democratic Senator turned justice, Hugo Black the driving intellectual force of the Warren Court whom insists on taking seriously the Constitution's words and spirit, guaranteeing free speech, racial equality, religious equality, the right to vote, the right to counsel and much more.  
      Among today's scholars, the originalist cited most often by the Supreme Court is also a self-described liberal and registered Democrat yours truly. The best originalists heed not just the founders' vision but also the vision underlying its amendments, especially the transformative reconstruction and women's suffrage or reconstruction amendments and women's suffrage amendment.  
      I believe that Justice Kavanaugh will be in this tradition. On various vital issues, voting rights, governmental immunities, congressional power to enforce the reconstruction amendments, Justice Kavanaugh's constitutional views may well be better for liberals than were Justice Kennedy's.  
      Point three, Kavanaugh's writings reflect proper respect for tradition and precedent. Originalists start with the Constitution's texts and structure, but almost always need to consult other constitutional sources such as tradition and precedent. Harmonizing these different constitutional sources requires great legal acumen. Kavanaugh's record shows that he is adept at harmonization.  
      Point four, Kavanaugh's views on executive power have strong constitutional foundations. Many of Kavanaugh's views about the Executive Branch are quite standard. On several other Executive Branch topics, Kavanaugh's views are not yet conventional wisdom, but are nevertheless sound and indeed align well with the testimony I offered this committee in 1998 and 2017.  
      Point five, the best basis for assessing would-be Justice Kavanaugh is the track record of Judge Kavanaugh. The judicial track record is more approximate and relevant than Kavanaugh's pre-judicial life.  
      Point six, Kavanaugh would work well with his new colleagues. I predict that Kavanaugh, a studious and open-minded conservative who likes listening to and engaging with moderates and liberals, will be a pro-intellectual and anti-polarizing force on the court.  
      Point seven, judicial nominees should not make substantive promises about how they would rule on specific legal issues, nor they should they make recusal promises that closely approximate substantive promises.  
      Point eight, Senators may properly oppose a judicial nominee simply because they disagree with a nominee's general constitutional philosophy or likely constitutional votes on the bench.  
      Point nine, the current Senate confirmation process is badly flawed and should be changed for future vacancies.  
      Point ten, back to point one, responsible naysayers must become yeasayers of a sort; they must specifically name better nominees realistically on the horizon. If not Brett, who? Distinguished Republicans, Kavanaugh is your team's brightest judicial star rejoice.  
      Distinguished Democrats, don't be mad, be smart, be careful what you wish for. Our party controls neither the White House nor the Senate. If you torpedo Kavanaugh, you'll likely end up with someone worse someone less brilliant, less constitutionally knowledgeable, less studious, less open-minded, less good for America.  
      Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you very thank you, all, very much.  
      Before I ask my questions and take five minutes to do that, Senator Tillis is going to Chair this committee after I get done answering questions for this panel, I should say. I'll be back, but I will because I'll be gone when you separate I want to thank all of you for your participation in this process. And then I think after this panel, it's scheduled that we would have a lunch break.  
      I'm going to start with Mr. McCloud because it seems to me you've clerked for different people with different views on on interpreting the law and the Constitution Judge Sotomayor I believe and and also Judge Kavanaugh. So I'll let you define yourself what the most character most important characteristics of the Supreme Court Justice is, and if you see Judge Kavanaugh meeting these?  
MCCLOUD:  Well, I think the most important characteristics are, first of all, intelligence and faithfulness to to the law. I think Judge Kavanaugh, as his reputation shows from his years on the D.C. Circuit, has those characteristics in spades.  
      I think something that's maybe under appreciated in terms of the work the Supreme Court does is how closely the justices work together and I share just Professor Amar's view that Judge Kavanaugh would work well as a colleague on the Supreme Court.  
      He's talked during these hearings about the idea of a team of nine working together with his colleagues on the court to achieve a goal of justice and interpreting the law fairly, and I think that he would live that model if he were appointed to the Supreme Court.  
GRASSLEY:  Yeah, thank you.  
      I'm going to ask Ms. Garry this, but it's based upon a very strong point that Professor Murray made, that we hear a lot about what professor or I mean Kavanaugh has done for people that have worked close with him. She fears that he may not take the average American's point of view into mind in his work as a judge, so what would you want the average American to know about Judge Kavanaugh as a person and how he might see their problems? Not the people he's associated with all of his life.  
GARRY:  I think Judge Kavanaugh 
        
GRASSLEY:  Push the button, will you?  
GARRY:  In my experience, Judge Kavanaugh listens and hears everyone he speaks with. I do think he considers people from a variety of backgrounds. I don't think he's lived only in one sphere; I think he has exposed himself to a wide range of people. And I think that he would listen empathetically and hear their voices.  
GRASSLEY:  And probably a point he's made, and the how he serves at at for low-income people at congregate meal programs, as an example would be one way I would see from what he has said.  
      Ted Olson, you are famous in the legal community in this town and may and around the country as well, so you ought to interact with a lot of people that in turn have interacted with Judge Kavanaugh. What do other members of legal professions say about the experiences that they've had with Judge Kavanaugh?  
OLSON:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's a very good question.  
      The fact is that throughout his legal career I have heard nothing but the highest praise for Judge Kavanaugh as a human being, as a lawyer, and as a judge. As far as I can tell and as far as I have heard he is uniformly respected by his peers on the D.C. Circuit with whom he has worked, in many cases for 12 years or more, including also the most recent appointees to the court.  
      Every lawyer that I have spoken to who has appeared before Judge Kavanaugh has respected the experience and has related to me the fact that he has listened, he pays attention, it's impossible to tell exactly how is going to decide until you read the decisions that he makes.  
      So in summary, the answer to your question is I do not know of a lawyer or a judge who is more uniformly respected in terms of his personality, his character, his integrity, his fairness, and his competence.  
GRASSLEY:  Yeah.  
      Ms. Sinzdak, you obviously remember him as a good teacher. What what are those qualities if you can transfer them to being a good judge and eventually a Supreme Court justice? What would you say about what you learned of him in in class versus his being a a judge?  
ROH SINZDAK:  I think the qualities are directly transferable. I think he was a great professor because he not only listened and engaged more than he talked but he knew how to get people explaining their arguments in the best possible way and I think that as a judge, too, he needs to listen to everyone before him. He needs to be able to engage with different viewpoints.  
      And then also he needs to be able to treat those viewpoints equally. And as in our class, I think he was open-minded and wanted to listen to all to people of all ideologies equally, wanted to hear the different sides of a of a discussion. And similarly, I think that as a justice he will listen to both sides of an argument; he will consider those.  
      And then thirdly he knows what's important in the law. I mean, he he wasn't just a teacher; he was a law professor. And what he told us was that what matters in the law is what the law says not what your policy preferences dictate and I think that in many ways that's the most important quality for a justice and I think that he exhibited that.  
GRASSLEY:  Yeah.  
      Senator Feinstein?  
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you very much. I want to just pick up on the last sentence that you said, that the issue qualities really shouldn't matter; it should be the fairness, the likability, the qualifications only. And that might be fine if some of the critical things that many of us and I'm going to speak for myself as a woman who's been a mayor. I represent 41 million people.  
      And, Ms. Baker, America is like you out there today and the young woman. I see it over and over and over again. And Ms. Weintraub, I am so proud of you; stand tall, be strong. You're quite wonderful to be here today.  
      So and, Professor Murray, I think you are very cogent. I thank you for your remarks. I've never in all my years here been with a panel, the majority of whom are women, and each one of you brought a different point of view and it is very, very, welcome.  
      For me Ms. Garza, I wanted to ask you a couple of questions, if I could, because the Jane Doe case is really a problem for me because what it showed was there were so many things in her treatment I didn't like.  
      The way she was treated by the office of refugee resettlement; she was subjected to unnecessary sonograms; forced to go to a crisis center; subjected to harassment as I understand it; had been physically abused by her parents and went to a Texas judge and received an order of approval.  
      I don't have that order of approval; what did that order of approval say?  
GARZA:  Well, in Texas you have to get a judicial bypass to bypass the consent from your parents and to consent to your own abortion care and that order is typically based on a best interests assessment whether or not it's in Jane's best interest to go ahead and proceed with making that decision on her own or whether or not she's sufficiently mature enough.  
      So in and in this case she was it was in her best interest to go ahead and proceed with that. Texas court decided that and that's how the case moved forward.  
FEINSTEIN:  Now, the panel that the nominee in question was on, were questions asked? Were you there?  
GARZA:  No, your 
        
FEINSTEIN:  it was an appellate court I understand that.  
GARZA:  No, I was not there. However, I did listen to it. The question was not in the order was not in question. A Texas court made that decision. Jane went through every single hoop she needed to go through in Texas including complying with the Texas law the two days. And she was just being blocked. She wasn't being allowed to be to to go to her medical appointments and she wasn't allowed to be released to her ad litems to myself as her guardian ad litem or her attorney ad litems that were appointed by state courts.  
FEINSTEIN:  And and why was that?  
GARZA:  Just to obstruct her ability to enact her decision. It it was a policy enacted under ORR and they directed the facility not to allow her to be released.  
FEINSTEIN:  So, Professor Professor Murray, I think the arguments have been made here and my great query is, women have never historically been treated equal and finally, you know, we got the vote, it began to change, we were able to go to higher education. The United States began to accept women and now the world seems to be changing in favor of women.  
      What I am most worried about this, is that Roe goes down and for what this meant in my generations which were the '50s excuse me the '50s and '60s when the death toll was estimated to be between 200,000 and 1.2 million of women that went to illegal abortionists and died. I don't want to see us go back to that day, and so that is inherent in this vote.  
FEINSTEIN:  Weapons in this country are inherent in this vote and if you look at where America is going, also the quality of the individual who's going to sit in that deciding seat, I think, overwhelms most else.  
      In your analysis and you spoke very cogently how would you analyze this judge affecting those issues?  
MURRAY:  Thank you, Senator.  
      It's clear to me, reading Judge Kavanaugh's opinions on these reproductive rights cases, that he says he is following Supreme Court precedent but that is not the case.  
      In the Garza case, which is the only abortion case to come before him, Judge Kavanaugh said he was following the settled precedents, yet he did not even engage the question in Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt, which would have required him to weigh the benefits of a delay against the burdens it would have imposed against Jane Doe.  
      That's required by the Supreme Court under its most recent decision in Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt. He did not engage that at all.  
      In requiring that Jane Doe take an additional 11 days for the government to seek a sponsor, his decision defied Bellotti v. Baird, a 1979 case where the Supreme Court held that a state cannot require a minor to obtain parental consent or even to notify a parent unless it provides an alternative judicial bypass option for determining whether an abortion is in the best interests of that minor.  
      And as Ms. Garza has said, Jane Doe went through that state-required procedure to have a judicial bypass. She obtained that bypass. A Texas state judge determined that an abortion was in her best interest. The government then still prevented her from obtaining the abortion care she needed.  
      And Judge Kavanaugh's decision, which would have required the government to continue looking unsuccessfully for a sponsor for an additional 11 days, would have further delayed her care, making it almost six weeks from the time she decided to have an abortion until when she could actually receive it.  
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you.  
      Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Cruz?  
CRUZ:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      Thank you to each of the witnesses who are here.  
      Professor Amar, let's let's start with you.  
      You are widely acknowledged to be one of the most respected constitutional law professors in the country. In your opinion, is Judge Kavanaugh qualified to serve as a Supreme Court justice?  
AMAR:  Unquestionably.  
CRUZ:  How would you compare his level of qualifications to other Supreme Court nominees, without specifically disparaging any any other nominee?  
AMAR:  I have great respect for all the justices. But if I would actually say, without naming names, that, you know, I might rank him I might predict that at the end of were he to be confirmed by this body, at the end of his service he he would rank well above the average. In the I would say in the top tier of modern justices. And the modern justices are quite impressive.  
CRUZ:  Ms. Sinzdak, you you were a student of Judge Kavanaugh's?  
ROH SINZDAK:  That's correct.  
CRUZ:  What was he like as a professor?  
ROH SINZDAK:  Well, again, he he was open-minded, principled. He was very fair. I mean, he was also a a really nice guy.  
      I I take the point of my colleagues, that likability isn't that isn't necessarily a criteria. So I I didn't gear my my comments in that direction. But he was wonderfully warm. He took students out to dinner and was very friendly.  
CRUZ:  So, am I right that you were part of the legal team that brought a challenge to President Trump's so-called travel ban? Is is that right?  
ROH SINZDAK:  That's correct.  
CRUZ:  And and in your experience at Harvard with Judge Kavanaugh as a professor, you found him fair, open-minded, willing to listen to views from multiple perspectives?  
ROH SINZDAK:  I did.  
      I like to hope that I used a lot of the things I learned in Judge Kavanaugh's class to bring that challenge against what I still consider an unconstitutional order.  
CRUZ:  Mr. Olson, you served with Judge Kavanaugh in the George W. Bush administration. You were you were solicitor general while he was in the White House. What was your experience in terms of any professional interactions you had had with him at that time?  
OLSON:  We did not have a great deal of professional interaction, because his position in the White House did not directly relate to what the solicitor general was doing. We worked often with the counsel to the president, the White House counsel.  
      But from time to time, there were opportunities to see the kind of input that he was providing to the people in the White House, the senior officials in the White House, including the president.  
      He was scrupulous as far as I could tell, scrupulously balanced in making sure that the president and other senior officials in the department were were receiving even-handed presentation. So that, he would assure that with one side was being advanced to the president, that the other side was also being demonstrated.  
      His thoughtfulness impressed, I think, everyone around him that was dealing with him, both from the standpoint of the White House and the Justice Department.  
CRUZ:  Now, you've argued in courts of appeals all over the country. Have have you had the opportunity to present oral argument before Judge Kavanaugh on the D.C. Circuit?  
OLSON:  I have. I presented argument in one of the cases involving separation of powers, the constitutionality of the Consumer Finance Protection Board.  
      And we heard that case en banc in the in the D.C. Circuit. All of the judges were engaged in that case. It was the kind of case that the D.C. Circuit is very good at, because it involves separation of powers, it involves the structure of government.  
      All of the judges on that case were engaged. The argument must have gone on for a couple of hours. Judge Kavanaugh was was as engaged, if not more so, than the other judges.  
      He at the end of the day, he did not agree completely with the arguments that we were making, but he wrote a very thoughtful, reasoned opinion concurrence concurring opinion with respect to concurring dissenting opinion with respect to the constitutionality of the Consumer Finance Protection Board.  
      He very carefully parsed what the Supreme Court had said in the Free Enterprise Fund case, and came to a conclusion that was, I thought, very persuasive although I didn't completely agree with it, very persuasive and reasonable.  
CRUZ:  Let me thank each of the witnesses for being here on this panel.   
      And and I want to echo what Senator Feinstein said in particular. Ms. Weintraub, thank you for your powerful and inspirational testimony. Thank you for being here and being part of this panel.  
WEINTRAUB:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Klobuchar?  
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you.  
      Congressman Richard Richmond. Thank you so much for being here, and for your leadership.  
      I asked some questions yesterday of the judge, about voting rights. And I referenced data from the Brennan Center for Justice showing that 23 states, as you know, have now have more restrictive voting laws than they did in 2010.  
      Can you elaborate on the consequences of Shelby County? And as you know, yesterday Judge Kavanaugh noted that Section 2 of the law remains in effect. And is, in your view, Section 2 sufficient to protect voting rights?  
RICHMOND:  Thank you for the question.  
      Section 2 is absolutely not sufficient. And for states like the state I come from and some of the other Southern states that were Section 5 states, which had to pre-clear their actions that affect voting rights. They were not chosen by random; they were chosen because of their past history of affirmatively trying to disenfranchise minority voters.  
      And so because of Shelby, you don't have that anymore and you saw the race to the legislature as soon as Shelby was decided, where the courts held that the disenfranchisement and the discrimination basically was done with laser-like precision.  
      So you 
KLOBUCHAR:  Word from the Circuit Court?  
RICHMOND:  Yes, so you see the voter ID laws you just saw in Georgia where they where there was an attempt to close polling locations right before a gubernatorial race with the opportunity to elect the first African-American governor in this country.  
      So it's a big concern for us.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Right, and gerrymandering as you know. This past term, in Abbott v. Perez, 5-4 Supreme Court upheld a number of Texas electoral maps that the dissent said burdened the rights of minority voters. Again, 5-4 decision.  
      Based on Judge Kavanaugh's record and his testimony before the committee, what do you think the future holds there when it comes to gerrymandering with him on the court?  
RICHMOND:  We're very concerned and and if you look at the effect that it has in terms of representation, especially for minorities and I'm not just saying that what's important is the ability to elect a minority candidate of your choice.  
      In many instances, minorities choose to elect non-minorities, like Steve Cohen who represents Memphis, Tennessee and does an amazing job, but the ability to elect a minority is important. And so if the court shifts toward makes a drastic shift in terms of gerrymandering, then we we face the ability of rolling back the clock in terms of African-American and minority representation in this country.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you very much.  
      Ms. Baker, thank you so much. I don't think we've focused enough on that case and you really brought it to light here. Can you tell us quickly why it's important that women are able to access affordable contraception, as well as the impact that you think Judge Kavanaugh's confirmation could have on the laws in this area?  
BAKER:  Absolutely. For me, as a Christian, I definitely believe that well, one of my favorite Bible verses is John 10:10, in which Jesus says I have come that you might have life and have it to the fullest, and I definitely believe that birth control helps us to live our best lives as women.  
      It helps us to go after, you know, education or our careers, helps us to better plan our families and when we're ready to have children, and so if and when and so I really think that is critical to helping empower women and continue the advance forward for women in society.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you very much. And I I think the the idea here is that you are someone that is pro-life, is that correct?  
BAKER:  That's correct.  
KLOBUCHAR:  And you're someone that just simply wanted to be able to afford contraception after you got married 
BAKER:  That's correct.  
KLOBUCHAR:  is that right?  
BAKER:  Yes.  
KLOBUCHAR:  And so the Affordable Care Act there, you were hoping to use those provisions and to be able to there's other things in there that's helpful, as well not getting kicked off of insurance with pre-existing conditions, an issue that came up here a number of times in our questions and concerns.  
      But one of them was that you were hopeful about getting contraception that you could afford, is that right?  
BAKER:  That's correct.  
KLOBUCHAR:  when you got married?  
BAKER:  Yes.  
KLOBUCHAR:  And so then what happened here is you go and you get an IUD and then you find out that the employer is somehow able to exercise their religious rights. Could you explain that just a little more for people?  
BAKER:  Yeah, absolutely. So I had even gone and done my due diligence and checked with my personal insurance company about the benefits and everything and made sure that it was all clear not just my knowledge of the ACA and it said it would be covered.  
      And so when I went to get my IUD, they gave a pregnancy test as well to you know, because it is being used as contraception, and so went and got it put in and then a few weeks later we got the EOB for $1,200, and that was about a month before our wedding and 
KLOBUCHAR:  Right.  
BAKER:  you can imagine the stress that already comes with planning a wedding and then putting that on top of it we're trying to start our new life together and so it was just a very difficult thing.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you.  
      And, Professor Amar, I I would ask you questions but I'm out of time and also you'd have to recuse yourself since your my daughter's college adviser.  
        
      But I would I would like to note that your comments about the judge having standard conventional opinions maybe we can talk about it after but it just is not my opinion based on looking at his rulings on net neutrality or his some of the things he said about Chevron or what he said about the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. And so I'm looking forward to debating that with you at at a break.  
      Thank you.  
TILLIS:  Senator Kennedy?  
KENNEDY:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I I would like to thank all of you for coming today. I know a lot of work went into your statements. I find this kind of testimony very helpful.  
      Number two, I want to especially thank my colleague, Congressman Richmond; I've known him a long time. Before he became a a distinguished Congressman, he was a distinguished member of the Louisiana House of Representatives. And he is a smart guy and a fine American and a good guy, too.  
      Number three, Ms. Baker, you you're a Methodist?  
BAKER:  Free Methodist, that's correct.  
KENNEDY:  All right, I'm a Methodist, too. When Becky and I got married, I I was raised in the Presbyterian church, my parents founded two Presbyterian churches so I was a Presbyterian and my wife, Becky, was a Methodist. So we compromised and I became a Methodist.  
        
      Ms. Sinzdak, did I say that right?  
ROH SINZDAK:  Sinzdak.  
KENNEDY:  Sinzdak, I appreciated your testimony too, as I did the testimony of all of you and I apologize again for hitting you in the head when I was going down to sake the 
ROH SINZDAK:  That's OK, no harm.  
        
KENNEDY:  hand.  
      Mr. McCloud, you what year did you clerk for Judge Kavanaugh?  
MCCLOUD:  I clerked for him from 2013 to 2014.  
KENNEDY:  OK, and then you went on to clerk for the Supreme Court after that?  
MCCLOUD:  I I did, Senator, for Justice Sotomayor.  
KENNEDY:  OK, and now you're with Williams Connolly?  
MCCLOUD:  Yes, Senator.  
KENNEDY:  You're an associate there?  
MCCLOUD:  Yes, Senator.  
KENNEDY:  Have a lot of free time, do you?  
MCCLOUD:  Not much, Senator.  
        
KENNEDY:  I agree with my colleague, Senator Feinstein, that our world is getting better for women. I I I'm biased of course, but I think our world is getting better for many Americans; I'm proud of that. In the in the last 20 months, the United States Congress and President Trump have cut taxes, increased wages, helped create 4 million jobs, delivered 4.1 percent growth in our domestic product, deregulated the economy, improved healthcare, I believe, for our veterans 

KENNEDY:  strengthened our military, stood up to China and Iran and North Korea and Russia. And last but not least we we have confirmed some I think very accomplished men and women to join the federal judiciary, including but not limited to one Supreme Court justice and I think soon to be a second Supreme Court justice. And I I'm proud of that record.   
      And I thank you, all, again for sharing your thoughts with us today.  
TILLIS:  Senator Whitehouse?  
WHITEHOUSE:  Thanks very much.   
      Professor Amar, you mentioned recusal so let me follow up with you a little bit on the recusal question.   
      When you have a judicial nominee whose name has been put forward by the subject of an ongoing criminal investigation and by someone who has been named in open court as directing other criminal activity, in the event that those criminal investigations should ultimately come before the court and the nominee of that subject and that named co-conspirator is then on the court, it is fair to say is it not that the question of recusal is a very live and legitimate issue?  
AMAR:  Senator, it is, and I think back to the Nixon tapes case where one justice who had been appointed by Richard Nixon and who had worked in the Justice Department and Watergate involved questions about the head of the Justice Department, John Mitchell one justice, then-Justice Rehnquist did recuse himself on the 
        
WHITEHOUSE:  so 
AMAR:  Nixon tapes case. Three did not.   
      My thought is that that has to be decided when the case arises and there should never be a promise of any sort to any nominator to this body in the confirmation process about how you'll vote or even how you'll recuse; you decide that when the case comes before you. And Rehnquist decided one way and three other justices appointed by President Nixon decided it the other way.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Now, since that episode the Nixon episode there has been some case law at the Supreme Court developed in the area of judicial recusal has there not?  
AMAR:  There has. One thinks for example of Justice Scalia's decision not to recuse himself in a case involving the Vice President then-Vice President Cheney in his official capacity.  
WHITEHOUSE:  I meant actual legal precedent as opposed to behavioral precedent at the court, and I'm specifically referring to the Caperton decision.  
AMAR:  Oh, sure. Sure.  
WHITEHOUSE:  What is your summary of the Caperton decision?  
AMAR:  Thank you, Senator. So one important thing to understand about that case which arose out of West Virginia is it involved a state judiciary a state-elected judiciary and one problem with state elected judiciaries I know a lot of states have them, I'm not a fan of them nor is Justice O'Connor retired Justice O'Connor has actually made a crusade of this issue is you have to raise money to run and then you don't have life tenure and you have to raise money to run again.   
      And that makes it very different it seems to me than a federal judge. One of the great glories of the federal system is once you're confirmed, it's there it's to the Supreme Court, it's a life-tenured position and you shouldn't make any promises getting it but even if you did they're not really as a practical matter easily enforceable because you never have to run again.   
      So I see that case as quite distinguishable in important ways. It also involved a financial 
        
WHITEHOUSE:  although look at the standard look what was the standard that the court used to apply to the judge in question to determine that he was constitutionally required to recuse himself? Was it not that the funder by virtue of the amount of funding that he put into the race had a significant and disproportionate influence on that judge occupying that seat?  
AMAR:  That was part of the standard. If memory serves  
        
WHITEHOUSE:  the actual standard  
AMAR:  it's an opinion of of of Justice Kennedy, for whom Brett Kavanaugh clerked, and there were about 40 different factors actually that in the dissent by Chief Justice Roberts were sort of identified as possible limiting considerations in that case. But you're absolutely right 
        
WHITEHOUSE:  standard was significant and disproportionate influence in putting the judge into that seat correct?  
AMAR:  It was a it did involve a a huge financial contribution by a private person  
WHITEHOUSE:  Correct 
        
AMAR:  in a case that was already pending when when the the the person was running for state Supreme Court  
WHITEHOUSE:  correct.  
AMAR:  pending case, a huge financial contribution by a private individual 
        
WHITEHOUSE:  And in this case you have a pending criminal investigation and you have somebody who has done a good deal more than put $3 million toward getting that judge in the seat; he has actually 100 percent put that judge in the seat. Do you not see that there is any potential relevance between the Caperton decision and the decision that judge Kavanaugh would face if confirmed?  
AMAR:  I may I answer? I have thank you, Mr. Chair so, it's not 100 percent that's what this body actually is about. Presidents don't put people on the Supreme Court and if you had any concern whatsoever that any promise of any sort was made to the president or anyone in the White House about this litigation I would say you should vote no because promises are improper.  
      There there is another relevant precedent on judicial recusal and to repeat, when that case comes before the Supreme Court, were Justice Kavanaugh to to be on it, he's going to have to make that decision as is everyone else. I just don't want him to promise anything one way or another as part of the process of the coming Justice Kavanaugh.  
      But I start con-law every year teaching Marbury v. Madison, which as you know, actually has a really interesting recusal question arguably in it, because John Adams, at the very end of his administration, is putting his Secretary of State John Marshall on the court, and then the case comes before now a Chief Justice John Marshall, and there's a real question whether he should recuse - have recused himself.  
      I believe he should have, but that's because he had first-hand knowledge of adjudicate fact of the case, but not merely because he happened to have been picked by one president, because all justices are picked by one president or another one and confirmed by a Senate.  
      So it's actually the first question we do in Marbury v. Madison is the judicial ethics recusal question. And I don't think it's a sufficient basis for recusal, just that you happen to have been nominated by a president who happens to be implicated in a - a litigation.  
      That might not be enough.  
TILLIS:  Senator Feinstein we recognize for a correction of the record.  
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you, I appreciate this Mr. Chairman, because I apparently misspoke. It is the estimates of the number of illegal abortions in the '50s and '60s that range from 200,000 to a million two per year.  
      I said deaths, that is not correct.  
TILLIS:  Senator Hatch?  
HATCH:  Well thank you Mr. Chairman. Mr. Olson, you're a - you've been at the center of the D.C. legal community for decades. What is Judge Kavanaugh's reputation among the lawyers you know, and how is he - how is he thought of in regards?  
OLSON:  I do not know of anyone in the judiciary or in the legal profession in Washington D.C. or anywhere around that who is respected more than Judge Kavanaugh. Now there are other judges, of course, who have a reputation which is very, very high.  
      The D.C. Circuit on which Judge Kavanaugh sits is populated by very, very talented, very fair judges, many of whom could be perfectly well qualified to be on the Supreme Court. But my experience with respect to Judge Kavanaugh, it would be hard to describe someone with a greater reputation.  
HATCH:  Well thank you. You've appeared before Judge Kavanaugh in court many times. What kind of a judge is he? What type of a judge is he during oral argument?  
OLSON:  He is very attentive, like other colleagues on the court, as I said. This is a very, very fine court, but my experience has been that he has not only read the briefs, but he understands the history that brings a case to the court.  
      He's very, very thoughtful, he asks very hard questions of the litigants on - no matter which side you're on. Very perceptive, the sort of thing that you experience in the United States Supreme Court, where the justices are probing the strengths and weaknesses of your case and - and an advocate has to be ready to answer those hard questions.  
Judge Kavanaugh asks those hard questions and you can't tell from his questions where he's going to come out in a case. He's looking for information and analysis and input from the advocate. That is what a good advocate hopes for in a good judge.  
HATCH:  Well thank you. Professor Amar, what are the most important qualities you think Senators should look for in a potential Supreme Court Justice, and why should people from both sides of the political aisle, Republicans and Democrats, support Judge Kavanaugh's nomination?  
AMAR:  Senator, I - Senator, I did - I do believe that the most important job of the Supreme Court is constitutional interpretation and implementation. There's other things, but that's the most important.   
      And Constitution doesn't define itself, it requires a lot of - of careful study and I just thought that Judge Kavanaugh, more than any other sitting federal judge - Republican federal judge under age 60 has - has studied it with more care and scholarliness and consistency and range.  
      He - he's read very widely. I refer you to the very interesting exchanges he had with - with Senator Lee, for example, about the federalist papers. How many people would know federalist 37 and 39? Maybe 10, maybe 78.  
      So - but in answer to - as Senator Cruz did ask me a question and I should have said one other thing. It's not just that I think he'll be good on his own on the court, it's that I think he will actually help bring out the best in others.  
      I think it's a small group and I - and when I think about the one on one interactions and the collegial interactions, I - I see him as exceptional. And the final thing that I really do want my fellow liberals and Democrats to - to hear is I believe he actually is - is likely to be better than many are saying, even on this panel, on things like voting rights, on congressional power to implement the reconstruction amendments.  
      Many originalists don't pay enough attention to the amendments, to the woman's suffrage amendment, to the reconstruction amendments. They want to read what Judge Kavanaugh has written, both on the bench including a voting rights case that I actually think was a - an impressive opinion.  
      And I contrast that to Shelby County, for example, which I think was the worst decision of the last 20 years in - in fact, 15 years. I am actually optimistic about Judge Kavanaugh as someone who will very seriously take the vision of the reconstruction generation and the woman's suffrage generation alongside the founding generation.  
HATCH:  Well I want to compliment this whole panel, it's been an excellent panel. You - you folks are really happiness here on the committee with - with your testimony from - from everyone of you on the panel.  
      So I'm proud of you, appreciate you and it's one reason why this system does work better. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  
TILLIS:  Senator Coons?  
COONS:  Thank you Chairman Tillis. Congressman Richmond, welcome. I just wanted to follow up on the line of conversation there with Professor Amar.   
      Do you think Judge Kavanaugh is the right nominee to replace Justice Kennedy, particularly given Kennedy's critical voice and vote in Fisher v. University of Texas, where the Supreme Court upheld UT's race conscious admission policies, and given what - Judge Kavanaugh's decisional record.  
RICHMOND:  No. No, and that's a very real concern. Look, the question's been asked now very consistently about affirmative action, whether it's in the Bakke case or other cases about whether it's still necessary.  
      And I'll just say this - and it's - we'll take it out of legalese for a minute and just take it to plain old physics. If a ball is rolling down the hill, the only way to stop it is to apply equal and opposite force, and the ball of racism and discrimination in this country rolled down hills for centuries, and the only way to stop it is an opposite but equal force.  
      And that's what affirmative action, and that's what those cases mean. And if you look at some of the decisions and you look at Scalia's comments in the last case, he actually questioned the intellect of African Americans and their ability to - to succeed at prestigious universities.  
      So when you couple the other justices and their opinions with Kavanaugh's record, that's what leads to the real concern about where we're going to go with affirmative action, race-based factors in admissions and others.  
COONS:  Thank you, Congressman, Ms. Baker, thank you for both your testimony and your witness today, and thank you for bringing forward what is a a challenging and very personal fact pattern.   
      I just want to make sure I heard right. In some ways I think for you, the most shocking thing and the most upsetting thing was a decision that chooses the religious liberty interests of your employer, a company, really non-profit, but a company their views on what contraception you should be able to access versus your views about what you ought to be able to do in preparing for marriage and preparing for parenthood.  
      Is is that what sort of stuck most as I understood your testimony today, that really in particular, struck you as just baffling that the religious liberty interests of a company ended up trumping yours?  
BAKER:  Yes, absolutely. That is something that has stuck with me and throughout the whole process.  
COONS:  Thank you.   
      Professor Murray, I thought you did a particularly powerful job of explicating the range of ways in which Judge Kavanaugh's writing and opinions cause some hesitation or concern. It's in Priests for Life in his dissent that he was particularly clear about his view that the complicity of a corporation in being forced to check a box should outweigh the liberty interests of a real, live, breathing person.  
      Can you just comment on why that tension might strike you as novel or why, given Hobby Lobby, you might see this as a very difficult, long-term trend line in this court should Judge Kavanaugh be confirmed?  
MURRAY:  Thank you, Senator. There are a number of troubling messages that Judge Kavanaugh evinces in that dissent in Priests for Life.   
      The first that strikes me is exactly the concern that Ms. Baker related. The Supreme Court has said in Eisenstadt v. Baird decided in 1972, the year before Roe v. Wade that the right of privacy, if it means anything, is the right of the individual, whether married or unmarried, to make a decision so fundamentally affecting the person as whether to bear or beget a child. The decision about what kind of contraception a person uses is certainly wrapped up in that, and the Supreme Court has acknowledged it.   
      In the Hobby Lobby case, five justice of justices of the court said that ensuring access to contraception was a compelling governmental interest. What we saw in Priests for Life is that Judge Kavanaugh would defer substantially to the wishes of an employer to based on the employer's religious beliefs and the employer's faulty understanding of the accommodation process to deny an individual, like Ms. Baker, who has made a reasonable, contemplative choice about what is best for her and her family, and instead defer to the wishes of the employer.  
      And that is deeply concerning.  
COONS:  Chairman, one last question if I might?   
      Professor, just to continue, I I don't know if you got to see my line of questioning of Judge Kavanaugh I think fairly late last night about the Glucksberg test. He said all roads lead through Glucksberg. And I went through a line of examination with him about whether or not if that test deeply rooted in this nation's legal history and tradition if that had been applied, whether the outcome would have been the same in a whole range of cases relating to marriage, to intimacy, to access to contraception.  
      And as Justice Kennedy wrote I think importantly in Obergefell "if rights were defined by who exercised them in the past, then received practices could serve as their own continued justification and new groups could not invoke rights once denied."  
      Are you concerned that Judge Kavanaugh might depart from Justice Kennedy's vital jurisprudence and substantive due process and that that might have a real impact on how justice is dispensed in these areas going forward.  
MURRAY:  I think it's clear from Judge Kavanaugh's judicial record, senators, that he is not a jurist in the mold of Justice Kennedy, who frequently upheld these precedents like whole women's health, like Planned Parenthood versus Casey in his writings.  
Judge Kavanaugh, in these decisions has evinced a crabbed and narrow understanding of the right to liberty. The right to liberty that is enumerated in the Constitution is not fossilized in amber. It has changed over time to admit individuals who would not have been contemplated within the body of the people at the time of the founding or even just as the reconstruction amendments were being ratified.  
      So, the decisions like the right to marry have evolved. We didn't have a situation where individuals who wished to marry a person of the same sex could do so until just 2015. These decisions are all imperiled by a justice who would follow history and tradition unfailingly towards his outcome.  
COONS:  Thank you. I have many more questions but I'm out of time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
TILLIS:  Senator Lee.  
LEE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to all of you for being with us today. Mr. Olson, I'd like to start with you. Your name has been used a lot this week in our proceedings. Not necessarily with your whole name but your last name has made many appearances with a lot of references to Morrison v. Olson. And I was wondering if you could just tell us briefly a little bit about your experience with that case.  
OLSON:  Well the Morrison versus Olson case, as everybody on this committee knows involved in the constitutionality of the independent counsel statute under a statute that required the appointment of an independent counsel by members of the judiciary, preventing the removal of the independent counsel except under very narrow circumstances.  
      The constitutionality was challenged in the United States Supreme Court in a case that I think of as the Morrison case, but other people refer to as Olson Morrison versus Olson. And the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of that case on a 7:1 vote with, in my judgment, a very, very, persuasive dissenting opinion by Justice Scalia.  
      Over time I've heard from a number of people in the academic world-the legal academic world that Justice Scalia's opinion dissenting in that case which was he did describe as one of his most important contributions to jurisprudence, has received much more favorable attention over the years.   
      The importance of it is separation of powers and the extent to which power vested by Article II of the Constitution in the president shall be reserved to execution by the president or whether it shall be taken from the president and given to other individuals who are not accountable to the electorate through the electoral process. And, of course, I could go on and on, but I don't think you want me to do that.  
      It is an important case and it may be revisited some day.  
LEE:  And you raise a great point. In that respect judicial independence, somebody's willingness to stand out stand alone, at times dissenting or perhaps concurring in the absence of additional support can end up having a big influence, as Justice Scalia's dissent in Morrison v. Olson made clear or in the case of for example Justice Jackson's concurring opinion in Youngstown Sheet & Tube versus Sawyer. Over time they acquired more meaning.  
      Ms. Sinzdak, I wanted to talk to you a little bit about your class with Judge Kavanaugh. What was that like? And I noticed that you mentioned INS v. Chadha as something that he got you excited about. How did he get the class excited about Chadha?  
SINZDAK:  Well, I think it's naturally an exciting case.  
LEE:  I tend to agree but I've met exactly five people on planet Earth who agree with me there.  
SINZDAK:  Well, I think part of it was that he would, as I mentioned briefly in my remarks, open class talking about current events so he was very much about contextualizing separation of powers issues as they were affecting the real world, which kind of took what is a lengthy but scintillating opinion and kind of put it so it was about putting it in a practical context of thinking about the legislative versus the executive power.  
LEE:  Great. Thank you. Professor Amar, I can't resist the opportunity to talk to you about Hugo Black. You mentioned Hugo Black as someone you admire, someone you would look to. And yet he's someone who's offered a number of opinions I assume you would disagree with, author of Korematsu, for example. Tell me about your affinity for Justice Black.  
AMAR:  Justice Black always carried a copy of the Constitution around with him and I was charmed when Brett Kavanaugh pulled his out and it looked pretty well-worn to me as if he had maybe looked at it a time or two.   
      Justice Black reminds us that you don't have to have gone to a fancy law school to be one of the greats. I know it's been a concern for some. They think Professor Amar just likes a fellow because it's an Ivy-League club or something. You come to my office and you see in my office Abe Lincoln-two pictures of Abe Lincoln. And he's a guy who had less than a year's formal education in his whole life.   
      And Hugo Black didn't go to a fancy law school. He came from the Southland. He was underestimated, I think, in part because of that. There's a very interesting piece about country lawyering in the New York Times as an op-ed yesterday about how folks who sometimes come from the Southland or speak a slightly different way are underestimated by fancy pants Yankee, Ivy-League types.   
      So Hugo Black actually-and he's a Southerner who really a southern white person who really understood the reconstruction amendments. He was there in Brown versus Board of Education and the people from his hometown didn't like what he did in Brown versus Board of Education.   
      He championed the incorporation of the Bill of Rights against the states. He championed the right of even indigence in Gideon versus Wainwright, but long before that in a case called Johnson versus Zerbst indigents to have counsel. He was the driving intellectual force of the Warren court saying all sorts of things before Warren and Brandon got on the court.  
      And this body might be interested just in the fact that he was a former senator turned justice. And we don't have so many of those right now but maybe in the future we will, and it is a reminder that you do want all sorts of diversity on on your court and it really is an issue maybe if they're all coming as Federal Court of Appeals judges from a few schools. That's a genuine concern to think about.  
LEE:  Thank you very much professor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
TILLIS:  Senator Blumenthal.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being here. This panel really is extraordinary. Some really powerful advocates. Thank you, Congressman Richmond, for your standing so strong in a dark and dangerous time for our democracy.   
      When the history of this era is written my view is that the heroes will be our independent judiciary and our free press. And I'd like to ask you, Mr. Olson by the way, in the interest of full disclosure you and I argued before the Supreme Court together. You may not remember it because it was one of 63 for you but it was one of four for me.  
OLSON:  I remember it very well, Senator.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Thank you. And we won 9-0 in upholding the sex offender registry case.   
OLSON:  Correct.   
BLUMENTHAL:  I am deeply troubled by the attacks on our judiciary, and most especially from the president of the United States. You are absolutely right when you say and I'm quoting you our courts are the envy of the world. They depend on the faith and confidence of the public. Courts don't command armies or police forces and the president's attacks on the court undermine that credibility. And so I asked yesterday, Judge Kavanaugh, about some of those attacks and I was disappointed in his responses.   
      He would not even go as far as Neil Gorsuch did now Justice Gorsuch in saying that attacks on the judiciary are disheartening and demoralizing. I also cited to him some remarks made by President Trump about Justice Ginsburg, saying quote, her mind is shot, resign, we are all embarrassed by her. Don't you think that Judge Kavanaugh and members of our judiciary and all of us have an obligation to stand strong against these kinds of attacks?   
OLSON:  I can only speak for myself. I have the greatest respect for our judiciary in this country. I meant what I said; it is the envy of the world. It is the envy of the world, in part, because very, very fine people are put on our courts and our judges and justices exercise independence from the appointing authority and from everything in their background. They make independent decisions based upon individual cases. I deplore statements criticizing the integrity or intelligence of members of our judiciary across the board.   
      As far as Justice Ginsburg is concerned, I have to say that she is someone that I have the hugest respect for. She is a hero in this country, a warrior, she's stood for many, many great things. She argued cases in the Supreme Court that broke ground on behalf of women and on behalf of all of us and I respect her. I've argued before her; I lost a very significant case involving the Virginia Military Institute, which she decided. I was representing the State of the Commonwealth of Virginia.   
      She is an extraordinarily talented, able person; she remains so to this day.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Thank you.   
      Ms. Garza, when Judge Kavanaugh came before our committee and I asked him about the real world consequences of the delay, he characterized it as simply a delay in your client being able to terminate her pregnancy.   
      Wonder if you could describe for us what the consequences were and whether those consequences were apparent in the record so that they would have been known to a member of the court?  
      And I want to thank you, by the way, for the great work that you're doing in Brownsville. I've visited Brownsville. I know what you're doing to try to prevent separation of children from families and passports being taken away from American citizens and some of the other cruel and inhumane practices going on there.   
      But if you could talk to us about some of those consequences, I would appreciate it.  
GARZA:  OK. Thank you for your question. Well, I I had to see Jane go through all of it. Delaying her further she'd already been delayed at that point for for many weeks you know, the coercion tactics, the the pressure. And she never once wavered; never once. And this this could have affected her; she could have been forced to have a child against her will. So that was a real  
        
      BLUMENTHAL She had to have a surgical procedure, didn't she? Instead of other options?   
GARZA:  the medical abortion. Yes. If she she had the option to do a medical abortion early on but because she was delayed, and constantly, week after week she had to have the surgical abortion.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And were health risks 
        
GARZA:  And the health yes and the risks increased as she was being pushed further into her pregnancy.   
BLUMENTHAL:  My time is expired. Thank you. I have a lot more questions. This is a great panel and I want to thank all of you for being here today. Thank you.   
TILLIS:  Senator Booker?  
BOOKER:  Thank you very much.   
      So, firstly, I just want to ask a a a couple things because I was confused by some of the very I guess, very very pointed language. And so, Professor Murray, I'd like to start with you, if I can. You were you were mentioning the standards that were not applied in the Garza case.   
MURRAY:  Yes.   
BOOKER:  And and I and I pulled two cases you mentioned Bellotti, which discusses striking down a parental consent statute as unconstitutionally burdensome. So why wouldn't a judge that sticks to precedent stick to this case? I don't understand that.   
MURRAY:  It is also something I don't understand, Senator.   
      The Bellotti case is directly on point with the facts of the Garza case. Jane Doe had completed the required judicial bypass, which under Bellotti is an alternative to securing parental consent. And yet despite her having done that, Judge Kavanaugh in his decision before the three-judge panel and again in his dissent reiterated the need for a sponsor, right someone a support network to aid her in making this decision, adding additional delay. Something  
        
BOOKER:  But I but I've heard can you can you try to put yourself in the shoes of the judge? What excuse could he possibly have? There's a lot of bragging going on here that when it came to abortion cases or anything that he would follow precedent. I just I'm really sincerely don't understand how this was the the binding precedent of the court about undue burden.   
      The story we heard was gut-wrenching about what this individual had to go through. Gut-wrenching. And there was a clear burden, right? There was the more you waited, the more of a burden was being put on this person. I just I can you really help me understand this?   
MURRAY:  Well, during his testimony before this body, Judge Kavanaugh said that his insistence on Jane Doe having a sponsor was because she was a minor; she was alone in this country and he viewed it as sort of a proxy for parental consent. But again, I go back to the precedent. The Supreme Court  
BOOKER:  So a proxy for parental consent, but I again, heard in the testimony from Ms. Garza here that she was is it true that you were the appointed guardian?   
GARZA:  Yes, I was her guardian ad litem.   
BOOKER:  Right. And so that that to me just doesn't hold water.   
MURRAY:  I in in addition to precedent upon precedent, there were guardians upon guardians. She had a guardian ad litem, she had gone through the traditional bypass process, a judge in Texas had made the determination that an abortion was in her best interests, that she wanted the procedure and nonetheless, ORR refused to let her leave federal custody. And then Judge Kavanaugh compounded that injury by refusing to allow her to have the abortion, instead insisting that she have a sponsor, adding an additional 11 days to the delay.  
BOOKER:  And so just real quick, the the the other case you you mentioned, this Whole Woman's Health case is, again, about weighing certain standards, correct?  
MURRAY:  It's about weighing burdens and benefits. And, again, Judge Kavanaugh made no mention of that; he made no mention of the burdens of an additional delay. And Ms. Garza has spoken movingly about the difference between seeking a medication abortion versus a surgical abortion, which admits additional risk to the woman.   
BOOKER:  Right. Which I so this fiction that somehow and he used this and what did you think of it, when he used and maybe Ms. Garza, I can ask you what did you think of it when he used this this language, like abortion on demand? All the things, Ms. Garza, that he that you just outlined to us, does not sound like abortion on demand; it sounds like you're signaling something to a whole bunch of folks so you can get yourself on a list so that you can be considered for the Supreme Court.   
      Would you agree with that?   
GARZA:  Yes. I I simply, yes.   
        
BOOKER:  Why why use that term? Why use that term?   
GARZA:  I I don't understand what abortion on demand means because that was not the situation for Jane. I mean, she she was one of the most vulnerable people in our community; one of the most vulnerable human beings. She was an immigrant, she didn't speak English, she was in detention and she was being put under extreme pressure.   
      And and I felt it was unfortunate that Judge Kavanaugh did not take that into consideration.   
BOOKER:  So so I just want to say, this is like a fiction, that is being presented to us. That somehow there was not an agenda here, by this judge, in his for to try out for the Supreme Court, to a president that promised his supporters, "I'm going to put somebody on there that's going to overturn Roe."  
      Cedric, real quick. You said that equal and opposite force rolling down when it comes to racism you weren't saying that we should have racism against another group or or bigotry towards other people. You're talking about an equal and opposite force a positive force of justice, force of light. Right?  
RICHMOND:  Yes. Exactly. And and it was mentioned today, all the economic improvements in the last two years. But what what we have not talked about is the increased intolerance racial intolerance over the last couple years.   
      When we grew up, Senator Booker, it was well known about racial profiling and then driving while black, and that you could be stopped. But it's gone to another level now; now, it's just living while black. So whether you're studying at Yale, whether you're sitting in Starbucks, whether you're leaving a Airbnb that you purchased. All of a sudden, just being African-American makes you a criminal suspect. And that has happened since this president was sworn into office, so 
BOOKER:  And I just want to get you on the record because they're going to use your words, but you you believe you deal with that issue by pursuing justice; not by pushing one anybody 
RICHMOND:  No.  
BOOKER:  down. It's just by trying to elevate folks up as a matter of justice.   
RICHMOND:  Yes.   
BOOKER:  I just want to say to the Chair, I have one more question. It's going to be mean. It's going to be a mean question, so please don't interrupt me, though; let me get it out. And say potato, potato to you but this is going to be mean; let me get it out.   
      Akhil Amar, sir, Mr. Professor, I have one question for you. My final question. In your con-law class, do you regret passing me?   
        
BLUMENTHAL:  You you have a right to remain silent.   
        
      
BOOKER:  You are under oath.   
AMAR:  I think the only thing that I ever did to my Wikipedia page was add your name as one of my former notable students, because I'm so proud to be associated with you even if we disagree on this issue as we may very well.   
BOOKER:  Thank you, sir. Thank you very much.   
GRASSLEY:  Senator Harris?  
HARRIS:  Thank you.   
      A conversation has come up on Congressman Richmond asked you a question but a conversation has come up during this process that leads me to believe that there have been certain dog whistles that have been offered by this nominee especially in recent years, abortion on demand being one of them. Another being a term that he used, Congressman Richmond, in in a Wall Street Journal op-ed that I asked him about, and the term is "racial spoils system."  
      And he referred to a racial spoils system. It was in reference to a a Hawaiian case and the Office of Hawaiian Affairs. But I asked him about the the meaning of that term, and what did he mean when he used that term twice. And he told me, quote, "I'm not sure what I was referring to, to be entirely frank," when I asked him, what did he mean by using that term, and I explained to him that it's a loaded term.   
      And I I would like for you to to share with the committee what you understand that term to mean, and how it has been used based on your experience.   
RICHMOND:  Well, I'll tell you that it's very common dog whistle, especially in the South, where you're pitting and I'll just be as frank as I can, where 
HARRIS:  Please do.   
RICHMOND:  you're pitting poor white people against poor black people. And your justification to poor white people is that "the reason why you're poor is because minorities are scooping up all of the benefits that should be going to you." And this country is better than that. First of all, it's not true. But second, those programs and those things that I think that he refers to, are righting that very wrong history in this country.   
      But just the use of the term is what we see far too often today, which is the dog whistle. It's not even a dog whistle any more; it's just blatant pandering to a base of people. And I believe that it's a lot more significant than even you would address.   
      But think of that in the case of race-based factors in admissions, which will come back before the court because this Justice Department is investigating Harvard right now. So what does that mean for minorities that are applying to prestigious universities or universities all around the country, and that's why it's such a concern.   
HARRIS:  And to emphasize your point, Congressman and I actually mentioned this earlier in this process the judge has has been lauded for the the amount of thought that he puts into his writings, and the words that he speaks. And the fact that he would use such a loaded term and and said he didn't understand what it meant was troubling to me as well.   
      Professor Murray, even if a Justice Kavanaugh does not vote outright to overrule Roe, how else could he undermine a woman's right to make decisions about her healthcare? What other types of scenarios might come before the court, short of overruling Roe, that could impede a woman's access to reproductive healthcare or to an abortion?   
MURRAY:  As I said in my opening statement, it's not just the threat of overruling Roe but incrementally gutting its protections through a death by a thousand cuts. And there are at least over 10 cases currently pending at the lower federal courts that all concern restrictions on the methods of abortion that may be used 
HARRIS:  So if if you will, can you break down for the the the American public that is watching this hearing, so that you can speak to those people who are watching the hearing about the things that they're familiar with that could be impacted short of a Justice Kavanaugh overruling Roe?   
MURRAY:  Certainly. The restrictions that are pending throughout the states and, as I said, there there have been over 400 laws passed since 2011 these laws would increase wait times to obtain reproductive care like an abortion, they would eliminate certain methods of abortion like the dilation and evacuation procedure, which is the safest procedure that according to doctors for safely evacuating a fetus from the womb.  
      They would also do things like require doctors to tell their patients falsehoods about the abortion procedure that it leads to suicidal ideation or that it leads to breast cancer. These have all been disproven by science.  
      A number of these laws have been passed, many of these laws have been challenged and those cases are pending, and certainly there will be a case that may percolate and make its way to the Supreme Court. And if Justice Kavanaugh is on the bench he will be in a position to decide.  
HARRIS:  And to emphasize your point, all of these things could happen short of him overruling Roe, if he were the deciding justice on that case.  
MURRAY:  Again, we can make the protections of Roe utterly meaningless for millions of ordinary women in America by simply making this procedure inaccessible by putting it out of reach, by making it impossible, by making women drive hundreds of miles to obtain abortion care, by making them wait hours, making them leave their jobs, leave their families in order to access care.  
      That is their constitutional right.  
HARRIS:  Thank you.   
      Mr. Chairman, I have a document that I'd asked that be added to the record and ask for consent of that it's from Demos regarding this nomination. Demos is a public policy organization working for both political and economic equality for all Americans, and the report is in opposition to Judge Kavanaugh's confirmation based on concerns that his confirmation would threaten equal justice for people of color and the future of racial equity.  
TILLIS:  Without objection.  
HARRIS:  Thank you.  
TILLIS:  Senator Coons?  
BOOKER:  Mr. Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry if I I just I forgot to put into I ask unanimous consent that a letter from the National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health, in opposition to Judge Kavanaugh's nomination also be entered into the record.  
TILLIS:  Without objection.   
      Senator Coons?  
COONS:  Thank you, Chairman Tillis. I, too, would like would ask unanimous consent that a letter be entered into the record from the Leadership Conference on Civil Human Rights. This letter expresses strong opposition to Judge Kavanaugh's nomination on behalf of 180 different organizations involved in civil rights human rights.  
TILLIS:  Without objection.   
      Senator Hirono?  
HIRONO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      Ms. Weintraub, can you talk about the dangers you see for Americans with disabilities and their civil rights if Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed to the Supreme Court?  
WEINTRAUB:  Yes, thank you, Senator Han   
HIRONO:  Hirono.  
WEINTRAUB:  Yeah.  
HIRONO:  Even the Chairman has problems pronouncing my name, so it's OK.  
        
WEINTRAUB:  Well, anyway, I think I see the issue about the Doe case, these are three women with intellectual disabilities, very similar to myself and my friends, and we they weren't asked what they wanted to do in their to personal decisions around their body, and we all deserve the right to make decisions.  
      And yes, these women may or may not understand about these issues, but but that's why we bring our friends. I would never go in to a doctor's office myself. I would take my husband; I would take my supporters. I can tell you that and it was in my written testimony I just was diagnosed with diabetes and I brought in my husband. And we we didn't understand as I told you my husband also has a disability, and both of us didn't understand. So we we asked my sister to help us to understand these issues.  
      So what I'm basically saying is that nothing about us without us we need to be told we need to be involved in these decisions, and Judge Kavanaugh took that away from us.   
      Thank you.  
HIRONO:  Thank you.   
      There have been a lot of questions raised about Garza, and Judge Kavanaugh testified that this is for Professors Murray and Ms. Garza he testified that he viewed Garza as a parental consent case, but that was not a parental consent case, would you agree both of you?  
MURRAY:  It was not a parental consent case; The judicial bypass procedure had been followed and was in lieu of parental consent.  
HIRONO:  Yes. So why would this I would characterize that as a very obvious misstatement of the question before the court, and when you get get the issue wrong, you're likely to come up with the wrong answer.   
      So I think it was so fundamental that he mischaracterized or misstated the issue, would you agree with that both of you, Professors Murray and Garza?  
GARZA:  I I would agree with that for for sure.   
HIRONO:  So we can sit here would you agree with that?  
MURRAY:  Yes, I agree.  
HIRONO:  So we can sit here and talk about whether there should have been time for the sponsor to be found and all of that, but that only that is totally irrelevant   
MURRAY:  Yeah. That's correct, it was irrelevant.  
HIRONO:  to what should have been the real issue in this case whether or not she should have the right to abortion. So I think that is very troubling, when somebody who is about to be seated on the Supreme Court mischaracterizes the question before the court.  
      Now, I did want to ask you, Professor Murray, if you if you can talk about the contradiction in Judge Kavanaugh's dissents in Garza and parent Priests for Life, because I believe that he really wanted to reach a result in each case. They are different cases, but nonetheless though, they both have to do with women's reproductive rights. And in the end, he denied the women involved their reproductive rights, and I believe he misapplied the facts to the law to get there.  
      So can you talk a bit about you know the contradiction in the outcomes the dissents in Garza and Priests for Life?  
MURRAY:  Sure. I've spoken at length about Garza and the way in which Judge Kavanaugh ignored existing precedents such as Bellotti v. Baird, such as Casey and its undue burden standard and Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt, which requires judges to weigh both the burdens and benefits of a particular restriction.  
      In Priests for Life again I I've also spoken about that case what we saw is such incredible deference to the employer and the employer's religious beliefs and the employer's view that doing something as simple as filling out a form to notify the government of its objections to providing the necessary contraception is an impermissible burden on religious exercise.  
      So that suggests a broad deference that would be meaningful, as Ms. Baker has testified to millions of women  
        
HIRONO:  So he found undue burden in the Garza case and   
MURRAY:  essentially.  
HIRONO:  so very different, but what do you see as the common common element  
        
MURRAY:  The common the common element in all of that  
HIRONO:  Yes, common element.   
MURRAY:  Is there is no burden that's too great for the woman. There's a burden in Garza on Jane Doe, and in finding a substantial burden on the religious exercise of the employers, there is a burden in the absence of contraceptive coverage to women like Ms. Baker.   
HIRONO:  I think that's why there are so many people who are very concerned about Judge Kavanaugh being on the court. Because as you said, there are hundreds and hundreds of cases that states have passed that limits a woman's right to choose, so for him to say that Roe v. Wade even were he to say that Roe v. Wade is settled law, is of little comfort to those of us who support women's reproductive choice.   
      Thank you.   

TILLIS:  Professor Amar.   

TILLIS:  Professor Amar, welcome back to the committee. We my colleague here, Senator Coons and I were talking about how much we enjoy your insights, in spite of the fact that you hate our Special Counsel Bill, and we also agree that we're not going to allow you to talk about it because we'd have to extend the hearing for two hours.   
         
      Mainly because of Senator Coons' commentary.   
      I wanted to ask you a question about Judge Kavanaugh and his body of work, some 307 opinions. And could you if you've studied them, I assume you have, can you give me any insights into ones that you think best reflect his his this thought process in arriving in an opinion?   
AMAR:  In the appendix to my testimony, I offer a snippet from the Washington Post that I wrote about the PHH case that maybe I think it's the same one that that Ted Olson discussed involving the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and its structure, and what and Senator Klobuchar, I think, in passingly mentioned it also before she had in her remarks.   
      And what's impressive in particular about that case, it's the only case by a court of appeals that I actually assigned my students last year, I usually just give them Supreme Court cases. And what's so impressive about and this is long before the nomination, of course is it's trying to take seriously the founding, and its founding principles and the role of the president and the bureaucracy.   
      The first Congress agreed that presidents could fire cabinet officers at will. It's called the Decision of 1789, it's very basic. The Supreme Court has unanimously reaffirmed that the Supreme Court agreed with that in a very famous case called Myers, it's written by at the beginning of the 20th century by former President Chief Justice Taft, and today's Supreme Court takes it very seriously.   
      And so just Judge Kavanaugh was confronted with the Decision of 1789, this is cabinet officers are basically fireable at will, you know, we have all these independent agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal Communications Commission that whose members aren't removable at will, but only for good cause, and I know you're thinking, "Oh, this is perilously close to" but I'm not going to talk about I won't talk about it.   
      But so how are we going to take seriously the founding but also take seriously the 20th century with the rise of independent agencies that have been affirmed again and again and again by the Supreme Court, and I thought Judge Kavanaugh came up with a beautiful synthesis of founding first principles and respect for modern understandings and and institutions.   
      And I I and I do predict that the Supreme Court, when the case finally goes up, will perhaps embrace something very similar to to to that approach, and and and he'll fit in very well with John Roberts on one side, maybe Elena Kagan will will be part of of that. She understands executive power also. With someone like Clarence Thomas or or and and some of the others on on the other side.   
      So I think he'll he he will work as for a team of nine, but he will he will respect the founding a lot, but he also takes seriously modern precedence and modern realities.   
TILLIS:  Thank you very much, and thank everybody on the, Mr. Olson. The only comment I'll make, Senator Blumenthal, talking about that 9-0 decision, I'm not a Supreme Court expert, but that's a pretty definitive opinion, is that right?   
      I I want to thank all those on the panel  
BLUMENTHAL:  I I take I take complete credit for it.   
         
TILLIS:  I want to thank you all on the panel. I thought your opening testimony was outstanding, and with panels this size, it's very difficult to direct questions to everyone. But we do appreciate you all being here.   
      Congressmen, thank you for your time and and for your attention throughout the entire hearing.   
      We are going to take a 30-minute recess for lunch. That will give us time to transition to the next panel, so we will return at 01:03. We're in recess.  
