
GRASSLEY:  Good morning, everybody, and we welcome everybody back again, and especially Judge Kavanaugh and his wife, Ashley.  
      Yesterday, each senator made their opening remarks. We also heard from three people who had the honor of introducing Judge Kavanaugh:  Secretary Rice, Senator Portman and attorney Lisa Blatt, and we heard for the first time directly from Judge Kavanaugh. He made a powerful, compelling and convincing statement demonstrating his exceptional background and qualifications to serve our nation's highest court.   
GRASSLEY:  NBC news reported that Democratic members of the committee plotted with the minority leader to disrupt the hearing yesterday. Democratic senators interrupted the hearing 63 times before lunch. And in the audience, 70 people were arrested yesterday who were following their lead, all probably 

GRASSLEY:  very constitutionally prepared to do that, doing what the Constitution says, the right of freedom of speech. But we also were able to finally conduct our hearing the way it should be conducted.  

GRASSLEY:  Yesterday was just opening statements. It was only it was only our time as committee members 
       
GRASSLEY:  that we wasted on disruption and disorder over procedural matters. But today is different.   

GRASSLEY:  It was our time as committee members yesterday to make our case. Today is different. Today is the day that the American people are supposed to hear from the nominee.   
      This morning, we'll begin our questioning of Judge Kavanaugh. We will get through all members' first rounds of questions today, no matter how long it takes.  
      Members are allotted 30 minutes for the first round. If your time expires, your remaining questions may be continued, of course, in the second round tomorrow.  
      We'll take a lunch break, as well as probably two other 15-minute breaks throughout the day. For now, let's plan our first break after five senators or so have completed their questions. I assume that this will be around 12:15, which will hopefully coincide with the floor vote that's already scheduled. This would be a three-minute or a 30-minute break for vote and lunch.  
GRASSLEY:  But Judge, if you would like to take a break any other time, let us know. We're happy to accommodate that.  
      And with that, I will start the questioning of my 30 minutes.  
      Judge, for the last 12 years you have served as a federal circuit judge on one of the most influential circuits in America.  
      You have offered 307 judicial opinions and joined hundreds more, totaling more than 10,000 pages of record. You have decided some of the most pressing legal issues facing our country.  
      The Supreme Court of the United States, the one you're nominated to be on, has adopted a legal position your legal position from at least 12 opinions.  
      The Senate Judiciary Committee has received dozens of strong letters of support from hundreds of people, many of whom you know best, from all across the political and ideological spectrum.  
      And the American Bar Association has given you its highest rating:  unanimously well qualified. My Democratic colleagues have said that this is the gold standard of a judicial nomination.  
      There is no dispute that you're one of the most qualified Supreme Court nominees. Some people say the most qualified and I don't disagree with their judgment. And that could be for anybody coming before the United States Senate.   
      I'm not the only one who says that, because we have a letter from Robert Bennett, surprisingly President Clinton's attorney, and your opposing counsel during the independent counsel investigation of President Clinton.   
      He wrote a very strong letter in support of your confirmation. Quote, "Brett is the most qualified person that any Republican president could possibly have nominated. Were the Senate to fail to confirm Brett, it would not only mean passing up the opportunity to confirm a great jurist, but it would also undermine civility and politics twice over; first in playing politics with such an obviously qualified nominee; and then a gun again in losing the opportunity puts such a strong advocate of decency and civility on our nation's highest court."  

GRASSLEY:  Mr. Bennett also speaks highly of your integrity 

GRASSLEY:  and to your fairness and open-mindedness.  
      And so, without objection, I would enter that letter in the record.  
      Now to a question. I imagine that your 12 years of judicial service on the second highest court in the land has given you plenty of opportunity to think about my first question, which is:  What makes a judge a good one? And what influences in your life have shaped your vision of how a judge should go about doing his job?  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      I think the first quality of a good judge in our constitutional system is independence. Independence comes 

KAVANAUGH:  directly from 

KAVANAUGH:  Article III of the Constitution.  

KAVANAUGH:  And the independence of the federal judges really is guaranteed by the framers in our life tenure and our protection from pay reduction. So because we have life tenure, we are independent and immune from political or public pressure.  
KAVANAUGH:  So I think the first thing that makes a good judge is independence, not being swayed by political or public pressure. That takes some backbone, takes some judicial fortitude. The great moments in American judicial history, the judges had backbone and independence.  
      You think about Youngstown Steel, you think about, for example, Brown versus Board of Education, where the court came together and knew they were going to face political pressure and still enforced the promise of the Constitution.  
      You think about United States versus Nixon, which I've identified as one of the greatest moments in American judicial history, where Chief Justice Burger, who had been appointed by President Nixon, brought the court together in a unanimous decision to order President Nixon in response to a criminal trial subpoena to disclose information. Those great moments of independence and unanimity are important.   
      Respect for precedent is another one. We are a system of constitutional precedent. Precedent is not just a judicial policy. It's sometimes stated that it's just a policy. Precedent comes right from Article III of the Constitution.  
      Article III of the Constitution refers to the judicial power. What does that mean? What does judicial power mean? Judicial power, you look at Federalist 78, and it's - what's described there is a system of precedence. So precedence is rooted right into the Constitution itself and is constitutionally dictated to pay attention and pay heed to the rules of precedent.  
      Beyond that, being a good judge means paying attention to the words that are written, the words of the Constitution, the words of the statutes that are passed by Congress, not doing what I want to do, not deferring when the executive rewrites the laws passed by Congress, but respect for the laws passed by Congress, respect for the law, the words put into the Constitution itself. That's part of being a good judge. That's part of being independent. That's part of precedent.  
      And then I would say being a good judge there are human qualities in terms of the interaction. Although these confirmation processes focus on one person as if you're making all the decisions.   
      As I said yesterday, I'm joining a team of nine, if I were fortunate enough to be confirmed, and that means something. It means something in sports. In means something in judging. I don't make decisions by myself.   
      For the last 12 years, I have not been making decisions by myself. Every case has been in a panel of at least three judges, and you learn from each other when you're deciding cases. You work with each other when you're deciding cases.  
      And so, having collegiality and civility as Justice Kennedy showed us so powerfully repeatedly with how he conducted himself over the years, that's very important because those great moments that I was talking about at the beginning like United States versus Nixon, like Brown versus Board, the court came together in unanimous decisions, and the unanimity of the decisions added force. That took personal interaction. That took collegiality.  
      So I think, you know, I've tried to be a very collegial judge. I've tried to be civil. I want, Mr. Chairman, the losing party the losing party, in every case, to come out and say, "Kavanaugh gave me a fair shake. It was well-prepared. He wrote a clear opinion. He explained everything. I disagree, but at least I get it."  
KAVANAUGH:  So I want the losing party and I want both parties to walk out at oral argument and say, "He had an open mind. He gave me a fair shake." And I think I've done that for 12 years. I've tried to do that consistently. Everything you do as a judge matters in terms of being a good judge. Oral argument, writing opinions, how you decide. So those those are the qualities.   
      I guess the the last thing I always remember about it is the the thing I said my mom told me from the first instance:  Judging is not just about theory. It's not theory. It's not just what a Law Review article is.  
      Judging is real people in the real world. And every decision we make, no matter how high-minded it might sound, affects real people in the real world with real interests. And we have to remember that in how we explain the decisions.  

KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Now, following up on the wise words of Senator Sasse yesterday on separation of powers, your record before the Senate includes more than 10,000 pages of judicial writings over dozen your dozen years.  

GRASSLEY:  We have over 440,000 pages of e-mails and other records from your legal service at the White House and Judge Starr.  
      And we you have written extensively on the issue of our Constitution's separation of power among the three branches. And a key component of the separation of powers is the independent judiciary. Obviously, everybody learns in eighth grade civics about judges interpreting law. The judiciary must continue to be the least political and least dangerous branch. A judge's sole job is to find and apply the law evenly and fairly, without regard to the president who nominated him, the senators who voted for him, the parties before him, and the political consequences of his judicial decision.  
      So, Judge, let's discuss judicial independence from the executive branch.  
      No one, not even the president, is above the law. Some of my colleagues have criticized your views of presidential authority, suggesting wrongly, in my opinion that your views of presidential authority would not allow any meaningful check on the president, particularly this one.  
      Please tell us what judicial independence means to you, including whether you have any trouble ruling against a president who appointed you, and against the executive branch in any case before you. You've partly talked about independence, but apply it specifically to a ruling against a president or the executive branch generally.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      To begin with, you're correct:  No one is above the law in our constitutional system.  
      Federalist 69, Hamilton makes clear all the ways that the executive branch, as designed by the framers of the Constitution, was different from the monarchy. Under our system of government, the executive branch is subject to the law, subject to the court system. And that's an important part of Federalist 69. It's an important part of the constitutional structure.  
      In general, so too we, as judges, are separate from the Congress. We are not supposed to be influenced by political pressure from the executive or from the Congress. We are independent. We make decisions based on law, not based on policy, not made based on political pressure, not based on the identity of the parties.  
      No matter who who you are in your our system, no matter where you come from, no matter how rich you are or how poor you are, no matter your race, your gender, no matter your station in life, no matter your position in government, it's all equal justice under law.  
KAVANAUGH:  And again, look at our examples in history. I always I always will go back to the great moments in our history where these principles, which sound abstract if you're just describing them, were actually implemented.  
      And I go back to Youngstown Steel, and you think about it's a six-three decision where the Supreme Court rules that President Truman has violated the law by seizing the steel mills. Now, this is a time of war. A time of war where lots of Americans were killed and the Supreme Court's under pressure to defer to the President's war effort in a six-three decision.  
      But what's interesting, to me, Justice Clark. You don't usually talk about Justice Clark in that decision. Why is he important? He is important. He was appointed by President Truman to the Supreme Court. What a moment of judicial independence there, to rule in that case.  
      If you think about Justice Jackson who had been president working for President Roosevelt and then he dissents in the Korematsu case. Stands up and says what letting racism like this is like letting a loaded weapon lie around.   

KAVANAUGH:  Dissents against President Roosevelt's decision.   

KAVANAUGH:  Justice Jackson's 
FEINSTEIN:  Ask them to suspend.  

KAVANAUGH:  Justice Jackson's concurrence in Youngstown which is, of course, what has become the law, that three part test, category one, category two, category three. But again, he writes that concurrence in Youngstown. Why is that a moment of judicial independence?  
      He had taken positions contrary to that one. He had worked in the executive branch in the Roosevelt administration, yet when he's a judge he sees it differently as an independent judge.  
      How about Chief Justice Burger? United States versus Nixon, writes the opinion, unanimous, moments of judicial independence. So, it's resisting public pressure, political pressure. It's treating everyone equally no matter where you are what station. When I when I was a became a judge on the D.C. Circuit, I had a case called Hamdan v. United States. Who's Hamdan?  


KAVANAUGH:  So, in the Hamdan case, Hamdan is one of bin Laden's associates. You will never have a nominee.  

KAVANAUGH:  Mr. Chairman, should I proceed?  
GRASSLEY:  This is coming out of my time, but that's OK. Let these people have their free speech and interrupt the other 300 million people listening that this is your opportunity to speak to the American people and for them to make a judge about it. If they want to effect what the other 300 million people hear from you then that's just too bad. You proceed now.  
KAVANAUGH:  Hamdan is one of bin Laden's associates involved before September 11; the worst attack ever on American soil. He's prosecuted before military commission, the signature prosecution of the Bush administration, comes to the D.C. Circuit, I'm on the panel. I write the opinion saying that his military commission prosecution is unconstitutional. It violates ex post facto principles.  
      You'll never have a nominee who's ruled for a more unpopular defendant than ruling for Salim Hamdan. And why did I do that in that case? Why did I rule for someone who had been involved in the September 11? It's because the law compelled it, as Justice Kennedy showed us in the Texas versus Johnson case.  
      We don't make decisions based on who people are, or their policy preferences, or the moment. We base decisions on the law and Justice Kennedy's example of independence is something I've tried to follow.   
      And it means you know, you're not a pro as I said yesterday, not a pro plaintiff or pro defense judge, not a pro prosecution or a pro defense judge. I'm a pro-law judge and I've ruled for parties based on whether they have the law on their side. That's part of being an independent judge is ruling for the party no matter who they are so long as the party is right. If you walk into my courtroom and you have the better legal arguments, you will win.  
GRASSLEY:  I think you answered my next question based upon what you said about Hamdan. But there there there's probably other examples. You don't need to go into detail, but 

GRASSLEY:  You have President 


GRASSLEY:  President Bush appointed you. Are there other cases that there's been other cases, presumably, you've ruled against the administration of the person that appointed you?  
KAVANAUGH:  Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. There were a slew of cases on everything from the Freedom of Information Act to some of 
GRASSLEY:  OK.  
KAVANAUGH:  The administrative law cases. The Hamdan one is, certainly, the one that comes to mind, most, because of the importance of that case, yet, I ruled that it was unlawful.  
GRASSLEY:  Yes. Now, did anyone ask you to make any promises or assurances that all the all about the way that you would rule in certain cases?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
GRASSLEY:  Were you asked about your views on Roe v. Wade?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  

GRASSLEY:  On we're talking about separation of powers. Have you ever written any decisions where you used the 10th Amendment? I'm talking about division of powers between federal and and states.  
KAVANAUGH:  Mr. Chairman, most of the cases that come to the D.C. Circuit are at the national level and, therefore, involving questions of separation of powers between the legislative, executive, and judicial branches.  
      Of course, federalism is a critical part of our constitutional structure as well. The genius of our system, Federalist 39, as described by Madison, is that we have, both, a national government and a federal government, simultaneously.  
      And the House of Representatives really represents the, in some ways, the national part proportional representation. This body, with two senators from each state, represents, in many ways, the federal part. Each state represented equally.  
      And the federalism system by which the states are allowed to regulate local matters, and some of the Commerce Clause cases such as United States versus Lopez and United States versus Morrison reinforce the idea that there is a core of authority that is, exclusively, in the province of the states, and beyond the scope of the federal government.  

KAVANAUGH:  The 10th Amendment, we 

KAVANAUGH:  The 10th Amendment reinforces the structure of federalism that's in our constitutional system. It's important always to remember the role of the states in our constitutional systems. And it's important to recognize as individual citizens something we often forget, particularly in a process like this:  Our rights and liberties are protected by the federal Constitution and by the federal courts, but they're also protected by state constitutions and state courts.  
      A great judge on the 6th Circuit, Judge Jeff Sutton's, written a new book about using state constitutions to help protect your individual liberties and rights too.  
      This whole document, through the separation of powers and the federalism, tilts toward liberty tilts toward liberty.  

GRASSLEY:  OK.  
      Now we've talked about your independence from a president. There's also the question of independence from the legislative branch; equally as important.  
      You're going to be asked about your personal views on a variety of topics and whether you believe various Supreme Court cases were correctly decided. Presumably this is because senators are going to try to predict how you'll rule in cases before you. The idea is that if you agree with your personal views on if they agree with your personal views on particular issues of morality or on Supreme Court precedent, they maybe would vote to confirm you. If not, they might not.  
      Of course, that's improper. Judges should never promise their future votes on on the bench in exchange for a senator's vote for them. If you answer these questions about your views on specific Supreme Court cases or public controversies of the day, you'd be showing the opposite of independence from the legislative branch.  
      Politicians can make promises about how they'll vote on issues, judges by the very nature of the job should never promise any outcome.  
      If a nominee answers these questions, it threatens the undermines judicial independence.  
      Of course, there may be times where it's appropriate to reconsider certain decisions, especially if more recent opinions have called into question the rationale of the original decisions.  

GRASSLEY:  So with this in mind, I'd like to explore the approach that you'd take toward Supreme Court precedent.  
      Could you tell us your views on the value of precedent? I think you've already done that, but if you want to expand on it, go ahead.  
      Have you ever followed precedent of the Supreme Court when doing so conflicted with your personal beliefs?  
KAVANAUGH:  My personal beliefs are not relevant to how I decide cases.   
      The the role of precedent in our system, which I said is rooted in Article III of the Constitution, it's not just a judicial policy.  

      The role of precedent's to ensure stability in the law, which is critically important.  
      It's also to ensure predictability of the law, people who order their fares around judicial decisions need to know that the law is predictable. Whether you're an individual or a business or a worker, you need to have predictability.  
      People rely on the decisions of the courts, and so reliance interests are critically important to consider as a matter of precedent. They are one of the reasons we have the system of precedent, so that people can rely on the decisions.  
      Precedent also reinforces the impartiality and independence of the judiciary. The people need to know in this country that the judges are independent, and that we're not making decisions based on policy views.  
      Part of that is to understand we're following a system of precedent, of what has been before. The court every time someone gets on, it's not just bouncing around to, "What do I think's best?" It's what's the precedent of the Supreme Court is always part of the analysis; an important part.   
      And for 12 years I've been applying precedent of the Supreme Court and of my court. Every day for 12 years I haven't been getting up saying, "How can I rewrite the law?" I've been getting up for 12 years every day saying, "OK, how can I apply this 4th Amendment precedent to this fact pattern that comes before me?" or, "How can I apply this 1st Amendment precedent to this fact pattern that comes before me?"  
      So precedent is the is the foundation of our system, it's part of the stability, it's ensuring predictability and it's and it's just foundational to the Constitution, as Article III and Federalist 78 make clear.  

GRASSLEY:  Now, you'll be asked by other members which Supreme Court precedents you like and don't like. But as you know, it's inappropriate for a nominee to to answer those questions.  
      And this refers to Justice Ginsburg. She said, quote, "A judge sworn to decide impartiality can offer no forecast, no hints, for that would show not only disregard for the specifics of a particular case, it would display disdain for the entire judicial process," end of quote.  
      The underlying reason for this, of course, is that making promises or giving hints undermines the very independence that we've discussed. Would you agree with that?  
KAVANAUGH:  I I do, Senator, Mr. Chairman.  
      And one of the things that I have to remember sitting in this seat is that this moment is a moment of judicial independence, with how I interact with this committee.  
      And what I've done in in each of the jobs I've had, and particularly as a judge over the last 12 years, but also in the executive branch, you always ask I always ask myself, and I tell people I'm working with that, "How has it been done before? How has it been done before?"  
      So as a judge, "How has it been done before?" is precedent, that's "How's it been done before?"  
      When I'm sitting here what did I do? I went and studied all the nominee precedents. I've studied I've read Thurgood Marshall's hearing and Justice Brennan's hearing and I've read the hearings of the eight justices currently sitting on the Supreme Court. It's what I call nominee precedent.  

KAVANAUGH:  And so all the nominees currently sitting on the Supreme Court, all the justices, have made clear a couple things.  
      First of all, they can't discuss cases or issues that might come before them. As Justice Ginsburg said, no hints, no forecasts, no previews.  
      That also means with respect to at least the vast body of Supreme Court precedent going back, you can't give a thumbs up or thumbs down on the case. That's Justice Kagan's formulation. She said repeatedly, "No thumbs up or thumbs down," when she was asked, "What do you think about this case? What do you think about that case?" I liked her formulation there:  no thumbs up or thumbs down.  
      That nominee precedent, as I call it, is now, in my view, part of the independence of the judiciary. And that nominee precedent is something I need to adhere to when I am here as a nominee now, because that's one of my jobs here is not to advance my own interest, but to remember I'm a representative of the judiciary as a whole, and I have a responsibility to judicial independence right here, right now as a nominee.  
      So following that nominee precedent's going to be critical.  
      Now, there's an exception that the eight justices have drawn currently sitting on the court if you read all the hearings, for some older cases. And I'll be happy to some older cases, not where nominee precedent does allow the justices has allowed them to talk about a few older cases.  
KAVANAUGH:  And again, why do we do this? Why is this nominee precedent there? When eight justices of the of widely ranging views do this, there must be a reason. The reason is judicial independence. What does that mean? It means two things in this context.  
      One, the litigants who come before us have to know we have an open mind, that we don't have a closed mind, that we haven't committed something in this process that is going to affect how we decide a case because we feel bound but we by what we promise to this committee. And believe me, judges do feel bound by what they said to this committee. So if I say something and the case comes before me five years from now, I'm going to feel morally bound by what I said here.  
      And if I've crossed the line of what I should say, then I'm not going to have an open mind in that case. That's that's a violation of judicial independence. Secondly, as Chief Justice Roberts described perhaps better than anyone, if I get in into some kind of process that appears to be a bargaining process where I say well, I'll agree with this decision in exchange for your vote it's never that explicit, but that's, as Chief Justice Roberts described it, that's kind of the what what what seems to be going on sometime.  
      Well that's a complete violation of judicial independence. Because then the judges aren't making their decisions based on their reading of the law, it's really as Chief Justice Roberts described it, it's the Senate or the Senate Judiciary Committee really sending a nominee as a delegate to the judiciary and really doing what the Senate Judiciary Committee thinks is the right thing to do.  
      Chief Justice Roberts explained very forcefully that doing that would be a violation of judicial independence. That nominee precedent weighs heavily on me as a nominee here. Because it's rooted in judicial independence and I've said repeatedly already that I'm going to be an independent judge. Well, I have to be an independent nominee as well, so I'm going to have to adhere to the lines drawn by those prior nominees, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  With only 25 seconds left, I'm going to reserve that time and go to Senator Feinstein.  
FEINSTEIN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Judge.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you.  
FEINSTEIN:  I'm sorry about the circumstances, but we'll get through it. I wanted to talk to you this morning about guns and go back to Roe v. Wade, if I might.  
      My office wrote the assault weapons legislation in 1993. It was law from '94 to 2004. And it essentially prohibited the transfer, sale and manufacture of assault weapons. It did not, at the time, affect possession. I happen to believe that it did work and that it was important.  
      And I've watched case after case and I think I mentioned earlier school shootings, which are just I I never thought this would happen in our country, that someone would bring a semiautomatic assault weapon into a school and just mow down children and staff.  
      And so I've been very interested in your thinking on assault weapons. You specifically argue that the D.C. assault weapons ban was unconstitutional and I think because you said these weapons were in common use.  
      What did you base your conclusion that assault weapons are in common use and what evidence or study did you use to do that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Senator Feinstein, for the question. And I understand, of course, your role on that issue and your long leadership on that issue and appreciate that.  
      I faced a decision where, as in every other decision, just about, on the D.C. circuit, I had to follow precedent, precedent of the Supreme Court. I don't get to pick and choose which Supreme Court precedents I get to follow. I follow them all.  
      And so in the Second Amendment context the Supreme Court, in the Heller decision, written by Justice Scalia, had held that there was an individual right to keep and bear arms. And then in explaining what that meant and what exceptions would be allowed to that right, Justice Scalia's opinion for the court, in part three of the opinion, went through this does not mean that there's no gun regulation permissible.  
      So that was an important part of the opinion, part three of the Supreme Court's opinion, where it pre-identified a number of exceptions that would be allowed:  Felony possession laws, concealed carry laws, possession of the mentally ill, possession of guns in schools, possession in certain kinds of buildings, he pre-identified that. As to the weapons, the way I understood what he said there and what was said in the McDonald case later was that dangerous and unusual weapons could be prohibited.  
      And what he referred to specifically is machine guns could be prohibited. So it's very important to recognize under the Heller decision machine guns can be prohibited. And machine 
FEINSTEIN:  They they were in the Firearms Act, a long time ago.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, and that's 
FEINSTEIN:  And have been prohibited.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, Senator. And Justice Scalia's opinion did not disturb that long-standing regulation in fact, specifically reaffirmed that machine guns could be prohibited. The court in Heller, the Supreme Court upheld or struck down a D.C. ban on handguns, most of which are semiautomatic 
FEINSTEIN:  I don't mean let me interrupt you because I don't I think we're on totally different wavelengths. I'm talking about your statement on common use, as common use being a justification. And assault weapons are not in common use.  
KAVANAUGH:  And Justice Scalia's opinion used that phrase, then I think the next sentence of the opinion talked about dangerous and unusual weapons and the court in Heller itself, the Supreme Court struck down a D.C. ban on handguns. Now most handguns are semiautomatic. That's something that not everyone appreciates. Most most most handguns are semiautomatic.  
      And the question came before us of semiautomatic rifles and the question was can you distinguish as a matter of precedent again, this is all about precedent for me, trying to read exactly the Supreme Court said and if you read the McDonald case and I concluded that it could not be distinguished, as a matter of law, semiautomatic rifles from from semiautomatic handguns and semiautomatic rifles are widely possessed in the United States.  
      There are millions and millions and millions 
FEINSTEIN:  You're 
KAVANAUGH:  of semiautomatic rifles that are possessed so that seemed to fit common use and not being an a dangerous and unusual weapon. That's that was the basis of my dissent. The in a nutshell, the basis my dissent was I was trying to follow strictly and carefully the Supreme Court precedent and you you I know you've read the opinion..  
FEINSTEIN:  You're saying the numbers determine common use? Common use is an activity. It's not common storage or possession, it's use. So what you said was that these weapons are commonly used. They're not.  
KAVANAUGH:  They're widely possessed in the United States, Senator, and they are used and possessed.  
      But the question is, are they a dangerous and unusual? They're certainly dangerous. All weapons are dangerous. Are they unusual?  
      And given how prevalent they are in the United States, it seemed under Justice Scalia's test and if you look at the majority opinion at McDonald's, the same thing. I want to reiterate, the Supreme Court made clear that machine guns can be banned. Machine guns can be banned.  
FEINSTEIN:  Let me speak to you. I'm talking about the Heller case. Let me be specific, and you specifically argued that it was unconstitutional to defend assault weapons because they are to ban assault weapons because they are in common use. And that, I believe, was your dissent in the case.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, and I was referring to some kinds of semiautomatic rifles that are banned by D.C. are in wide widely owned in the United States, and now seemed to be the test that the Supreme Court had set forth in the Heller and McDonald cases.  
      In other words, if a type of firearm is widely owned in the United States. Now, whether I agree with that test or not was not the issue before me. I have to follow the precedent of the Supreme Court as it's written, and that's what I tried to do in that case.  
      It's a very long opinion. I also made clear, Senator Feinstein, at the end of the opinion I am a native of this area. I'm a native of an urban suburban area where I grew up in a city plagued by gun violence and gang violence and drug violence. So I fully understand, as I explained in the opinion, the importance of this issue.  
      I specifically referenced that Police Chief Cathy Lanier's goals of reducing gang and gun violence was something I certainly applauded but that I had to follow the precedent of the Supreme Court in that case. And as I read it, that's what it said I'm sorry.  
FEINSTEIN:  How do reconcile what you've just said with the hundreds of school shooting using assault weapons that have taken place in recent history? How do you reconcile that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, of course the violence in the schools is something we all detest and want to do something about, and there are lots of efforts, I know, underway to make schools safer. I know at my girls' school they do a lot of things now that are different than they did just a few years ago in terms of trying to harden the school and make it safer for everyone.  
      Guns, handguns, and semiautomatic rifles are weapons used for hunting and self defense, but as you say, Senator, you rightly say they're used in a lot of violent crime and cause a lot of deaths. Handguns are used in lots of crimes that result in death and so are semiautomatic rifles. That's one of the that's what makes this issue difficult.  
      As I said in the last two pages of my dissent in Heller, I fully understand that gang violence, gun violence, drug violence that has plagued various cities, including Washington, D.C. This was known as the murder capital of the world for awhile, this city, and that was a lot of handgun violence at the time.  
      And so, I understand the issue, but as a judge my job, as I saw it, was to follow the Second Amendment opinion of the Supreme Court whether I agreed with it or disagreed with it. At the end of the opinion, I cited Justice Kennedy's Texas versus Johnson quite, which I read yesterday as the guiding light for the lower court judges and all judges.  
FEINSTEIN:  Let me give you a couple of other quotes, because I'm going to change the subject. Do you agree with Justice O'Connor, that a woman's right to control her reproductive life impacts her ability to, quote, "participate equally in the economic and social life of the nation," end quote?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, as a general proposition, I understand the importance of the precedent set forth in Roe v. Wade. So Roe v. Wade held, of course, and it reaffirmed in Planned Parenthood versus Casey, that a woman has a constitutional right to obtain an abortion before viability subject to reasonable regulation by the state up to the point where that regulation constitutes an undue burden on the woman's right to obtain an abortion.  
      And one of the reasons for that holding, as explained by the court, in Roe and also in Planned Parenthood versus Casey more fully is along the lines of what you said, Senator Feinstein, about the quote from Justice O'Connor. That's one of the rationales that undergirds Roe v. Wade. It's one of the rationales that undergirds Planned Parenthood versus Casey.  
FEINSTEIN:  Well, let me give you another one, rationale. In the 1950s and '60s, the two decades before Roe, deaths from illegal abortions in this country ran between 200,000 and 1.2 million. That's according to the Guttmacher Institute.  
      So a lot of women died in that period. So the question comes, and you have said today not today, but it's been reported that you have said Roe is now settled law. The first question I have of you is what do you mean by settled law? I tried to ask earlier do you believe that it's correct law? Have your views on whether Roe is settled precedent or could be overturned, and has your views changed since you were in the Bush White House?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I said that it's settled as a precedent of the Supreme Court entitled the respect under principles stare decisis. And one of the important things to keep in mind about Roe v. Wade is that it has been reaffirmed many times over the past 45 years, as you know, and most prominently, most importantly reaffirmed in Planned Parenthood versus Casey in 1992.  
      And as you will recall, Senator, I know when that case came up, the Supreme Court didn't just reaffirm it in passing. The court specifically went through all the factors of stare decisis in considering whether to overrule it.  
      And the joint opinion of Justice Kennedy, Justice O'Connor, and Justice Souter at great length went through those factors. That was the question presented in the case.  
FEINSTEIN:  Could I interrupt you to say, since you mentioned stare decisis, and I sat on nine of these hearings, and when the subject comes up, the person says, "I will follow stare decisis," and they get confirmed and then, of course, they don't.  
      So I think knowing going into it how you make a judgment on these issues is really important to our vote as to whether to support you or not because I don't want to go back to those death tolls in this country, and I truly believe that women should be able to control their own reproductive systems, within, obviously, some concern for a viable fetus.  
KAVANAUGH:  And I understand your point of view on that, Senator, and I understand how passionate and how deeply people feel about this issue. I understand the importance of the issue. I understand the the importance that people attach to the Roe v. Wade decision, to the Planned Parenthood v. Casey decision. I don't live in a bubble. I understand I live in the real world. I understand the importance of the issue. And..  
FEINSTEIN:  Well, my staff just passed me a note. Let me read it to you because I think it's a good have your views about whether Roe is settled precedent changed since you were in the Bush White House?  
KAVANAUGH:  My 
FEINSTEIN:  Yes or no?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I'll tell you what my views I'm not sure what it's referring to about Bush White House, but I will tell you what my view right now is. Which is it's important precedent Supreme Court that's been reaffirmed many times, but then Planned and this is the point I want to make that I think is important. Planned Parenthood v. Casey reaffirmed Roe and did so by considering the stare decisis factors. So Casey now becomes a precedent on precedent.  
      It's not as if it's just a run-of-the-mill case that was decided and never been reconsidered, but Casey specifically reconsidered it, applied the stare decisis factors and decided to reaffirm it. That makes Casey a precedent on precedent. Another example of that because you might say there are other cases like that is Miranda.  
      So Miranda's reaffirmed a lot but then in the Dickerson case in 2000, Chief Justice Rehnquist writes the opinion, considering the stare decisis factors and reaffirming Miranda, even though Chief Justice Rehnquist, by the way, had been a fervent critic of Miranda throughout his career, he decided that it had been settled too long, had been precedent too long and he reaffirmed it.  
FEINSTEIN:  What 
KAVANAUGH:  So precedent on I'm sorry to interrupt.  
FEINSTEIN:  I'm sorry to interrupt.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you.  
FEINSTEIN:  But I want to switch subjects and one last question. What would you say your position today is on a woman's right to choose?  
KAVANAUGH:  As a judge 
FEINSTEIN:  As a judge.  
KAVANAUGH:  As a judge, it is an important precedent of the Supreme Court. By it I mean Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey; been reaffirmed many times. Casey is precedent on precedent, which itself is an important factor to remember. And I understand the significance of the issue, the jurisprudential issue and I understand the significance, as best I can I always try and I do here of the real world effects of that decision, as I try to do of all the decisions of my court and of the Supreme Court.  
FEINSTEIN:  Well, I thank you for that. Let's go to presidential power for a moment. You were part of Ken Starr's independent counsel team, which conducted a sweeping investigation into possible wrongdoing by President Clinton and the First Lady. At the time, you argued for aggressive questioning of the president. You did not take the position that President Clinton was immune from investigation.  
      Since then you have taken the opposite position. In fact, you have said that, and I quote, if the president were the sole subject of a criminal investigation, I would say no one should be investigating that at all. What did you mean by that and what are the circumstances where a sitting president could be subject to criminal investigation?  
KAVANAUGH:  And I appreciate the the sign there. The the so the last sign I should have mentioned while I was up. The Second Amendment sign actually had a brackets around part of my quote. And I'm not sure if it was the exact quote, but this this one I'll I just wanted to point that out because 
FEINSTEIN:  Is this accurate?  
KAVANAUGH:  As a here's what I was saying, Senator. Let me explain it this way.  
FEINSTEIN:  Oh.  
KAVANAUGH:  The last one may or may not have been accurate, I just wanted to point that out for the record, it had brackets for my quote.  
      This one so what what what happens after the Starr investigation? Then I work five and a half years in the White House. So let me just give you, if I can, some context here. And and I'm going to get specifically to your question.  
      So I work in the independent counsel investigation and that is obviously difficult, controversial, a moment for our country that I wish hadn't happened.  
      We all wish it hadn't happened. And I reflect on that. I wrote a Georgetown University Law Journal article in '99 reflecting on some of my thoughts about that. This seems to be a tendency of mine to go through an experience, write an article reflecting on it.  
      And then I work in the Bush White House for five and half years and I write an article in the Minnesota Law Review, Senator Klobuchar, in 2009. When President Obama's in office, I should point out.  
      And I reflected on a number of things I had learned working in the independent counsel office and then working in the White House. And I thought there were number of things Congress could take a look at that I had experienced. One of them was I proposed timelines for consideration of Judicial nominees. I proposed 180 day up or down vote for every judicial nominee. That was something that, from my experience, I thought would avoid controversy and have rules of the road set in advance and I proposed that specifically for Congress to consider.  
      Other aspects. I I I said 
FEINSTEIN:  Well 
KAVANAUGH:  Another thing I proposed was for Congress to consider whether it should look at Clinton v. Jones or the principal Clinton v. Jones. So you call Clinton v. Johnson and said a president is subject to civil suit while in office, the Paula Jones suit. That was a controversial decision but the Supreme Court made clear at the end of the decision Congress could provide extra deferral of suits not immunity but deferral suits for presidents if Congress so wanted.  
      And so in the Minnesota Law Review article, I put out some ideas about whether Congress may want to think about that. And why did I do that? I think Senator Durbin asked yesterday what changed that made me think about that from the time. What changed was September 11. That's what changed.  
      So after September 11, I thought very deeply about the presidency and I thought very deeply about the independent counsel experience and I thought very deeply about how those things interacted.  
      And I thought very deeply about seeing President Bush when he came into the Oval Office on September 12, 2001 in the morning. President Bush said this will not happen again. This will not happen again. And he was of single-minded focus every morning for the next seven years for President Bush was still September 12, 2001. Single-minded focus. And then thinking back to the independent counsel experience in August of 1998.  
FEINSTEIN:  Let 
KAVANAUGH:  So I I proposed some ideas for Congress to consider. Here's the bottom-line point. They were ideas for Congress to consider. They were not my constitutional views.  
KAVANAUGH:  If a case came up that where someone was someone was trying to say this is a constitutional principle, I would have a completely open mind on that because I've never taken a position on the Constitution on that question. I've only put out proposals for you all to study, to think about the balance of a president fighting a war, leading a war and a president subject to say, ordinary civil lawsuits as in the Clinton versus Jones case.  
FEINSTEIN:  Let me ask you you're becoming very good, you're learning to filibuster. But let let me ask this question precisely. The Supreme Court has unanimously ruled that a president can be required to turn over information.  
      It upheld the subpoena for the tapes of Oval Office conversations that revealed President Nixon's efforts to cover up the Watergate break-in. This, as you know, was U.S. v. Nixon. You have said that the Nixon case might have been wrongly decided.  
      Was U.S. v. Nixon wrongly decided in your view?  
KAVANAUGH:  I so that quote is not in context, it is a misunderstanding of my position that's up there. I have repeatedly called U.S. v. Nixon one of the four greatest moments in Supreme Court history.  
      So I've called that the four I've always identified are Marbury versus Madison, Youngstown Steel, Brown versus Board of Education, and United States versus Richard Nixon.  
      And why why have I Brown versus Board, by the way, the single greatest 
       
FEINSTEIN:  Why is it rightly decided?  
KAVANAUGH:  So I have said that I've said yes, that a the court's holding, that a criminal trial subpoena to a president in the context of the the special counsel regulations in that case, for information a criminal trial subpoena for information under the specific regulations in that case, I have said that holding is one of the four greatest moments in Supreme Court history.  
      So not only what I was I can explain how that misunderstanding came up, because that's I know there was a news story about that and that's just not a correct impression of my views.  
      My views have been consistently why was it one of the greatest moments? It was one of the greatest moments because of the political pressures of the time, the courts stood up for judicial independence in a moment of national crisis.  
      That's the Supreme Court we need the Supreme Court to decide the things we can foresee, but one of the things that's really important for the Supreme Court, we're going to have crisis moments at the Supreme Court on things we can't even predict, and we need people on the Supreme Court who are prepared for that and U.S. v. Nixon is 
FEINSTEIN:  my my time is going to run out very quickly. Let me just ask you this, can a sitting president be required to respond to a subpoena?  
KAVANAUGH:  So that's a hypothetical question about what would be an elaboration or a difference from U.S. v. Nixon's precise holding.  
FEINSTEIN:  That's right.  
KAVANAUGH:  And and I think going with the Justice Ginsberg principle, which is really not the Justice Ginsberg alone principle, it's everyone's principle on the current Supreme Court and it's a matter of the cannons of judicial independence, I can't give you an answer on that hypothetical question.  
FEINSTEIN:  So you you can't give me an answer on whether a president has to respond to a to a subpoena from a court of law?  
KAVANAUGH:  It's my there's my understanding is that you're asking me to give my view on a potential hypothetical, and that's something that the every each of the eight justices currently sitting on the Supreme Court, when they were sitting in my seat, declined to decide potential hypothetical cases.  
      I can tell you about the U.S. v. Nixon precedent, and I did about Chief Justice Burger's role in forging a unanimous opinion, and really all the justices worked together on that. But Chief Justice Burger, who had been appointed by President Nixon been appointed by President Nixon, writes the opinion in U.S. v. Nixon.  
      8-0, Rehnquist was recused, 8-0, ordering President Nixon to disclose the tapes in response to a criminal trial subpoena. A moment of crisis argument I think July 8, 1974 they decided two weeks later, really important opinion, moment of judicial independence, important precedent of the Supreme Court.  
      But how that would apply to other hypotheticals, I best as a sitting judge and as a nominee follow the precedent of the nominees who have been here before and as a matter of judicial independence, not give you a precise answer on a hypothetical that could come before me.  
FEINSTEIN:  I understand, thank you very much for being forthcoming. I appreciate it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  I assume you want to reserve your three minutes?  
FEINSTEIN:  Can I do that?  
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
FEINSTEIN:  I will.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Hatch.  
HATCH:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin, I'd like to enter into the record three letters and an op-ed supporting Judge Kavanaugh's confirmation. The first letter, which I mentioned yesterday in my opening statement, is a letter from 41 attorneys who are members of the Supreme Court Bar.  
      The signers include people like Lisa Blatt, Dianne Maynard and Kathleen Sullivan. As the letter notes, the signers, quote, "hold a broad range of political policy and jurist prudential views, but they speak as one in supporting Judge Kavanaugh's nomination" unquote.  
      The letter authors write, quote, "based on our experience with Judge Kavanaugh and his work, over 12 years of distinguished judicial service, we are confident that he possesses the character, temperament and intellect that will make him an asset to our nation's highest court", unquote.  
      Now the second letter is from Carolyn Williams, a partner at the venerable D.C. law firm Williams & Connolly, who served on the ABA standing committee on the federal judiciary.  
      She writes that she has followed Judge Kavanaugh's legal career since 1990 when she was the hiring partner at the firm and he was a law student. Ms. Williams says that Judge Kavanaugh, quote, "has all the qualities litigants and lawyers hope to find in a Supreme Court justice, superb intellect and legal acumen, fundamental fairness and decency, abiding respect for precedent and the rule of law", unquote.  
      Now I also want to enter to the record a letter a letter and op-ed by Jay Lefkowitz. The op-ed appeared in National Review and is entitled "Brett Kavanaugh Is a Mensch". In it, Mr. Lefkowitz writes that Judge Kavanaugh, quote, "has a strong commitment to protecting Americans' freedom of religion, no matter what their faith", unquote.  
      And Mr. Lefkowitz would should know, he and Judge Kavanaugh worked together in private practice on a pro bono religious freedom case, representing a Jewish synagogue in Maryland.  
      And they won the case, vindicating the right of the congregation to build a place of worship in their neighborhood. Now let me just begin with this, before I begin, Judge, I'd like to ask you to keep your answers to my questions as concise as you can so I can get through as many as as time allows.  
HATCH:  Some of my colleagues have suggested that President Trump nominated you because he thought you'd rule in his favor, should certain issues come before the court. Suppose you had a case involving President Trump or an issue near and dear to the president. What assurances can you provide that you will not allow the president's personal views on a case or personal interest to impact your decision?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I'm an independent judge. For 12 years, I've been deciding cases based on the law and the precedent in each case. If confirmed to the Supreme Court, that's how I'll do it as well, be part of a team of nine. I'll decide cases based on the Constitution, the law, the precedence, Supreme Court, working with that the other eight justices without fear or favor independently, without pressure from any quarter, and the person who has the best arguments on the law and the precedent is the person who will win with me.  
HATCH:  Well, thank you. If at the end of a process, at this process you are confirmed to the Supreme Court, which I expect you will be, what sort of loyalty will you owe to the president? How will that loyalty differ from the loyalty you owe to, say, the American people?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, if confirmed to the Supreme Court and as a sitting judge, I owe my loyalty to the Constitution. That's what I owe loyalty to, and the Constitution establishes me as an independent judge bound to follow the laws written, the precedence of the Supreme Court as articulated subject to rules of stare decisis, and I would do so.  
HATCH:  OK. You were appointed to the D.C. Circuit by George W. Bush. I think it's fair to say you were close to President Bush. You worked for him for a number of years. Can you give us some example of cases in which you ruled against the Bush administration not withstanding that President Bush was the one who put you on the bench?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the most prominent example in the Hamdan case.  
HATCH:  Yes.  
KAVANAUGH:  That was the military commissions case. That was a signature prosecution of the Bush administration. They had established with congressional authorization eventually after a unilateral effort didn't succeed in the courts establish military commissions.  
      The military commissions were to try Al Qaida terrorists who had committed war crimes, and one case came to us, Salim Hamdan, and the question was was the prosecution unlawful because the crime of which he was convicted was not an identified crime as of 2001 when he was alleged to have committed it ex post facto principles, and I wrote the opinion reversing his conviction even though it was a signature of prosecution of the United States, even though it was a national security case because that was the right answer under the law.  
      And it doesn't matter who you are or where you come from. If you're right under the law, you prevail.  
HATCH:  I'd like to turn now to your work in the Bush Administration. As you know, my Democratic colleagues are demanding to see every piece of paper or every single scrap of paper you ever touched during your six years in the Bush administration in part because they want to know what role, if any, you played in developing the Bush administration's interrogation policies.  
      Well, six years ago, Ranking Member Feinstein who was then the Chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, and a good one at that, issues a lengthy report on the CIA's detention and interrogation program under President Bush.  
      The report detailed the origins, development, and implementation of the program. In 2014, a declassified version of that report was released to the public. The declassified version or report runs well over 500 pages, and your name appears nowhere in it. Now, I myself spent over 20 years on the Intelligence Committee. I know the quality of its staff and the work that they do, and I know the Ranking Member and how diligent she is. If you had played a role in the Bush administration interrogation policies, I think the Ranking Member would have discovered it.  
      Numerous administration lawyers appear in the report, but not you, and that should tell us something. With that said, Judge Kavanaugh, I want to ask you for the record what role, if any, did you play in developing or implementing the Bush administration's detention and interrogation policies?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, the policies that are reflected and described in Senator Feinstein's extensive, thorough report were very controversial. As you know, Senator, the enhanced interrogation techniques 
HATCH:  Right, right.  
KAVANAUGH:  and the legal memos that were involved in justifying some of those techniques also were very controversial when they were disclosed in 2004. And I was not involved. I was not read into that program, not involved in crafting that program nor crafting the legal justifications for that program.  
      In addition to Senator Feinstein's report, the Justice Department did a lengthy Office of Professional Responsibility report about the legal memos that had been involved to justify some of those programs. My name's not in that report, Senator, because I was not read into that program and not involved.  
      There were a number of lawyers this came up at my last hearing a number of lawyers who were involved, including a couple who were then judicial nominees. At my last hearing, I recall Senator Durbin asking about whether I also was likewise involved as these other judicial nominees had been, and the answer was no, and that answer was accurate, and that answer's been shown to be accurate by the office of professional responsibility report by Senator Feinstein's thorough report.  
      And I do want to say on Senator Feinstein's report, that is an important piece of work that collected facts about a program, that it's important for us to know those facts for the future. And I know it was an enormous effort and a lot of tough work to get all that information for Senator Feinstein and the Intelligence Committee, but I have looked through that report and looked through the Office of Professional Responsibility report. I was not read into that program, Senator. Thank you for asking.  
HATCH:  OK. Judge, you've been accused of misleading this Committee during your 2006 confirmation hearing regarding your role in developing the Bush administration detention policy. Now, you have a strong reputation in the legal community for honesty and integrity. Read any one of the dozens of letters we received supporting your nomination, and you'll see that right away.  
      Now, some of my colleagues may not give you the opportunity to answer this question fully, so I'd like to give you the opportunity now. Did you mislead this committee in 2006? If not, what is the source of the confusion about your prior testimony?  
KAVANAUGH:  I told the truth and the whole truth in my prior testimony. I was not read into that program. The subsequent reports of Senator Feinstein and Office of Professional Responsibility show that and that is what I did then, that's that that's the answer now.  
      I was not read I was not read into that program.  
HATCH:  OK, so I mentioned in my opening statement, 18 of your former women law clerks have written to the committee in support of your nomination. That's all of your former women law clerks who were not precluded by their current or pending employment from signing to the letter.  
      Now these women describe the mentoring and encouragement you've given them in their careers, and they say that you are quote "one of the strongest advocates in the federal judiciary for women lawyers," unquote. Quite a compliment.  
      The majority of your clerks in fact have been women, and I understand that you were the first judge in the history of the D.C. Circuit to have an all-female class of clerks. Why do you believe it important to encourage young women lawyers and to ensure that both men and women are well represented in the legal profession?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I believe in equality. Equality for all Americans, men and women, also regardless of race, ethnicity. My mom was an example, as I described yesterday, of breaking barriers, showing me first on racial equality by her example of teaching at McKinley Tech.  
      Then when she became a lawyer in the late '70s, there were not many women prosecutors at the time, definitely male dominated, in how she overcame barriers. Was a great prosecutor, became a state trial judge in Maryland appointed by Democratic governors.  
      She showed me by her example the importance of women's equality. During college, you've received a letter from 10 college friends of mine who were women, who were women athletes at Yale. Talked about how I treated them and women's sports with respect and as equal, even when I was in college.  
      You have a letter from 84 women I worked with in the Bush administration who talked about my efforts to work with them in the intense environment of the West Wing, especially after September 11th.  
HATCH:  Did you say 84?  
KAVANAUGH:  Eighty-four women signed a letter who had worked in the Bush White House in the Bush White House, and worked in that intense environment. But I had came to be a judge in 2006, May 2006. In August 2006, Linda Greenhouse of the New York Times runs a story in the New York Times about the scarcity of women law clerks at the Supreme Court that year.  
      There were seven I believe that year out of 37, and she wrote a story about that. And that seemed to me very odd and unacceptable, and I started thinking about what I could do. First of all, why's that happening and what can I do about it? What's the problem, what can I do?  
      So the problem seemed to me, these networks that people, judges rely on for clerk hirings and professor networks were getting were excluding women or at least women weren't fully represented in those. That's true with minorities as well, by the way.  
      And so I made sure when I was talking to professors at law schools, and I made sure I wanted to see a a a broad pool of qualified well-qualified applicants, including women.  
      And in that year for example, fall of 2006, which was my first year on the bench we hire a year ahead, so I'm hiring for 2007, and I hired three women for that clerk class 2007, three out of the four Zina Bash, Britt Grant and Porter Wilkinson Zina's right here. And that was the start of my efforts to make sure that women were not being excluded. And and I really worked on why this is happening.  
      So Yale Law women did a study about five years ago about participation in class, the differences on who gets called on in class and there's slight differences there, men and women, who then get selected as research assistants, slight differences there.  
      And it just keeps building until you get a disparity in the clerk network. And there's a pipeline problem, and I've said I'm breaking through that problem. I'm not I'm not listening to that, and so I've been very aggressive about hiring the best and understanding that the best include women. And as you say, senator, a majority of my clerks have been women 25. I believe 21 of them have gone on to clerk at the Supreme Court. And they're they're an awesome group, and if confirmed to the Supreme Court I will continue to do this.  
      What it takes and I think my mom showed me this, President Bush showed me this a little what it takes is not accepting the same old answer, oh, there's a disparity. Well, why and then do something about it, and I try to figure out why, you know And we can talk about minority clerks but on women, why were those disparities existed existing as described by Linda Greenhouse? And I try to figure out why and then I did something about it. I'm very proud of that, because I do believe that all people should be treated equally.  
      And the law clerk decision, which may sound ministerial and to some extent the job is helping the judge and shortly out of law school, but those positions are very important launching pads for the next generation of leaders, the people who will be sitting in these seats, the people who will be sitting in my seat. Lots of them are going to be coming from law clerks, so if we're not being inclusive now, that will show up later. And so it's just been a critical part, it's something I'm very focused on at all times, is equality in the clerkship hiring process and making sure women are getting the same opportunities that men are.  
      Appreciate the question, Senator.  
HATCH:  Well thank you, and I appreciate the answer. And I think everybody in this country should appreciate the answer, and I think it distinguishes you. Late last year, allegations against former 9th Circuit Judge Alex Kozinski surfaced when the Washington Post published an article detailing disturbing allegations of misconduct by the Judge.  
      You clerked for Judge Kozinski for one year in 1991, 1992. Some of your opponents have suggested that you must have known about these allegations. This seems to me to be an effort at guilt by association, which is not the way this committee should operate in any way.  
      With that in mind, I want to give you the chance to answer a few questions about Judge Kozinski so that we're all operating on the same foundation of facts. First, how long have you known Judge Kozinski?  
KAVANAUGH:  I clerked for him in 1991, '92, so I started the clerkship 27 years ago.  
HATCH:  The second and I understand from media reports that Judge Kozinski operated an e-mail list where he would send inappropriate material. Were you on this e-mail list?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't remember anything like that, Senator.  
HATCH:  How often did you talk with Judge Kozinski on the phone?  
KAVANAUGH:  Not often not often, Senator.  
HATCH:  How often did you see him in person?  
KAVANAUGH:  Again, not often. Maybe when there was a legal convention or 
HATCH:  That's what a lot of people don't seem to understand, you know.  
KAVANAUGH:  I was not working in the courthouse he was in the Pasadena Courthouse in California with it's a small courthouse with 10 other Court of Appeals judges in that courthouse. I, of course, was working in Washington D.C.  
HATCH:  When you did see, and talk with Judge Kozinski, what type of things did you talk about?  
KAVANAUGH:  We were among the 12 co-authors of the Bryan Garner led book on judicial precedent. So, for several years that was a project all of us were the 12 of us I guess it was, in total, were working on that. Diane Wood, a Chief Judge of the Seventh Circuit.  
HATCH:  Right.  
KAVANAUGH:  And Justice Gorsuch was also a co-author. So, we worked on that as a group. And then, Justice Kennedy, for the last 30 years, had had Judge Kozinski run his run Justice Kennedy's law clerk hiring process. And in that in the course of that process, I would have communications with the judge.  
HATCH:  OK. Did you know anything about these allegations?  
KAVANAUGH:  Nothing.  
HATCH:  OK. Before they became public last year?  
KAVANAUGH:  No. When they when they became public, the first thought I had was no no woman should be subjected to sexual harassment in the workplace, ever, including in the judiciary especially in the judiciary. And when I heard when that became public, I think it was in December, it was a was a gut punch. It was a gut punch for me.  
HATCH:  It was for me too.  
KAVANAUGH:  It was a gut punch for the judiciary. And I was shocked, and disappointed, angry, a swirl of emotions. No woman should be subjected to sexual harassment in the workplace. And I applaud Chief Justice Roberts appointed a committee of judges to establish better procedures. Chief Justice Garland did the same thing for our court.  
      And those are first steps. I don't think they are final steps by any stretch. And what this is part of a much much larger national problem of abuse and harassment. And one of the things we've learned is we need better reporting mechanisms. Women, in particular, in the workplace, need to know if they're the victim of harassment, where to report it, immediately, who who to report it to.  
      They need to be known know that they'll be safe if they report it. They need to have a safe working environment and be safe if they report it. They won't be retaliated against. And they'll be protected if they report. And that's part of the steps, or one of the steps that's, I think, being improved as a result of the working group, or a committee, that the chief justice has appointed.  
      And I'm interested in doing everything I can to assist those efforts to make those workplaces safe. Again, it's part of a broader national problem. Whether it's priests, or teachers, or coaches, or doctors, or business people, or news people, there's a lot there's a lot of there's a broad national problem that needs to be addressed, including in the judiciary.  
HATCH:  OK.  
KAVANAUGH:  And I applaud Chief Justice Roberts for doing so.  
HATCH:  OK. I'd like to talk to you, now, about these.  

HATCH:  I'd like to talk to you, now, about the Chevron doctrine.  

HATCH:  Now, this is an important judicial doctrine that makes that makes that takes its name from the Supreme Court case that created it back in the 1980s. In that case 

HATCH:  the Supreme Court instructed federal courts to defer an agency's interpretation of the law if the law is, quote, "ambiguous", unquote. Some of your academic writings express skepticism about the Chevron doctrine, and concern that it allows an administration to impose its policy preference by avoiding the political process.  
      I can understand why this would be appealing to an administration, but I also think it's a threat to the separation of powers because it transfers power from Congress and the judiciary to the executive branch.  
      That's why I've introduced the Separation of Powers Restoration Act to reverse the Chevron doctrine. Many members of this committee have co-sponsored this legislation. And as someone who has written extensively about the separation of powers, can you tell us why the separation of powers is so important, and how it how it helps to protects individual freedom?  
KAVANAUGH:  The separation of powers protects individual liberty because it responds to the concern the framers had that something Senator Klobuchar said yesterday from Federalist 47, that the accumulation of all power in one body would be the very definition of tyranny.  
      So, Federalist 47 talks about that, Federalist 69. So, the separation of powers, to begin with, protects individual liberty. It does so because Congress can pass the laws, but you can't enforce the laws. A separate body has to decide to enforce the laws. And then, even if they law is enforced and a citizen may say, well, I want someone who didn't pass the law or enforce it to decide whether I violated the law, or whether the law is constitutional.  
      And that's why we have an independent judiciary; to guarantee, as an independent matter, our rights and liberties. And the three branches, therefore, do separate things because it all tilts towards liberty. It's hard to pass a law, as you know, in the Congress. And then, even if it does get passed and affects your liberty, a separate body has to decide, usually the U.S. Attorney's Office, to enforce the law. And that's a separate decision. That helps protect your liberty.  
      And then, even if that happens, you go to a court and you say, either, I didn't violate that law, as I'm accused of doing, or that law is ill unconstitutional, or they're interpreting that law in a way that's not consistent with what the law said.  
      The court, independently, decides that. It's not the members of Congress, or the executive, deciding that. That's how the Constitution's separation of powers tilts towards toward liberty in all its respects.  
      Now, as to your specific question, Senator, one of the things I've seen in my experience in the executive branch, and in the judicial branch, is a natural tendency, but it's a natural tendency that judges need to be aware of and then respond to.  
      So, here's the natural tendency. Congress passes laws, but then doesn't have can't update the laws. So, maybe it's an environmental law, or maybe it's some kind of law dealing with national security. Let's take those two examples to illustrate.  
KAVANAUGH:  And then, an executive branch agency wants to do some new policy, and proposes a new policy to Congress, but Congress doesn't pass the new policy. What often happens, or too often I've seen is that the executive branch, then, relies on the old law as a source of authority to do this new thing.  
      And they try to say, well, the old law is ambiguous, so we can fit this new policy into the old law as justification for doing this new thing.  
      And I've seen this in national security cases. I've seen it in environmental. You see it all over the place. It's a natural phenomenon because the Executive Branch wants to implement what it thinks it good policy.  
      Now, when those cases come to court, it's our job to figure out whether the Executive Branch has acted within the authority given to it by Congress. Have you given them the authority? And my administrative law jurisprudence is rooted in respect for Congress. Have you passed the law to give the authority?  
      I've heard it said that I'm a skeptic of regulation. I'm not a skeptic of regulation at all. I am a skeptic of unauthorized regulation, of illegal regulation, or regulation that's outside the bounds of what the laws passed by Congress have said. And that is what is at the root of our administrative law jurisprudence.  
HATCH:  OK, one of the most important qualities I look for in a judicial nominee is the ability to impartially interpret the law and apply it to the case before the court.   
      Now, this can often be the most difficult part of judge's job, because it may require the judge to rule against a litigant that may be sympathetic or against a policy that the judge may personally agree with.  
      At Justice Sotomayor's confirmation hearings, Senator Schumer commended her for, quote, "hewing carefully to the text of statues even when doing so results in rulings that go against sympathetic litigants," unquote."  
      Do you believe that it's important for a judge to interpret and apply the laws that Congress has actually passed rather than seeking to make up or change the law if the judge doesn't like what the Congress has done? And if so, why or why not?  
KAVANAUGH:  I agree completely, Senator. That's at the foundation of what I view as the proper judicial philosophy.  
HATCH:  OK 
KAVANAUGH:  The separation of powers system you described, we have to stick to the laws passed by Congress. You make the policy. We'll follow the policy direction that you put into the laws that are enacted, passed by the House and Senate, signed by the president. We don't rewrite those laws. The Executive Branch also shouldn't be rewriting those laws beyond the scope of the authority granted.  
HATCH:  OK, some of my colleagues have criticized you for purportedly ruling too often against environmental interest. It seems to me that many of these circumstances boil down to the fact that some of my colleagues don't like the environmental laws Congress has actually passed and are frustrated that they haven't been able to get their own, preferred environmental policy signed into law.  
      Now, I've looked through your record, and I found that you have not hesitated at all to uphold environmental regulations when they were actually authorized by statute. Could you give us a few examples of cases where you have upheld environmental regulations because you concluded that Congress had authorized them?  
GRASSLEY:  Limited through as many few words you can as time has run out.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes. Senator, as I said yesterday, I'm a pro-law judge, and in an environmental cases, in some cases I've ruled against environmentalist interest and in many cases I've ruled for environmentalist interest.  
      And they're big cases, cases like the American Trucking Associations case where I upheld a California regulation for a majority over a decent, stricter air quality standards in the National Association of Manufacturers case, EPA rules for particulate matter in the UARG case, permit processes applicable to surface coal mining in the National Mining Association case, the Murray Energy case rejecting a premature challenge to a clean power plant regulation, the National Resources Defense Council case versus EPA ruling for environmentalist groups in a case that was a big money case where the industry wanted an affirmative defense to be created for accidental emissions.  
      The affirmative defense was not in the statutes passed by Congress. The industry came in with their lawyers and said, "Well, just write the affirmative defense into the law," and I wrote the opinion saying, "No, it's not in the law and yes, that might be a problem for industry, but we follow the law regardless."  
      And so, there are a large number of cases where I've rule in favor of environmentalist interests because that's what the law required in that case.  
HATCH:  Thank you, Judge. I appreciate it.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Senator.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Leahy?  
LEAHY:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning, judge.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Senator.  
LEAHY:  You and your family. We have a lot questions, and I know you've done a lot of preparation with some a couple of our distinguished Republican colleagues about the questions you might be asked, but let me ask you something that normally isn't an issue during supreme court hearings.  
      You testified before this Committee in both 2004 and 2006 as part of your nomination the D.C. Circuit Court. Then you were nice enough to come by my office and chat with me last month. I asked you that if you changed anything in your prior testimony, and you said no. Is that still your position?  
KAVANAUGH:  It is, Senator. I told the truth. I was not read into the programs 
LEAHY:  No, no, no. I'm not asking what we did about it. I just asked you if you would change anything in your 
KAVANAUGH:  I'd like to explain if I can.  
LEAHY:  I'm going to give you a chance because I'm going to ask you a couple questions. Go ahead.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I just wanted to explain that at the last hearing in 2006 in particular, you were concerned, understandably, because there'd been two judicial nominees who had been involved in the legal memos, in the legal discussions around crafting the enhanced interrogation techniques and detention policies.  
      You were concerned whether I also was involved in those, and I made clear in response to those questions that I was not read into that program. That was 100 percent accurate. It's still accurate today. I think Senator Feinstein's report and the Office of Professional Responsibility report establish that I was not involved in those programs.  
      Now, there were two judicial nominees 
LEAHY:  OK, I am going to go into that in a little bit. I don't want to go over my time as the preceding senator did. I want to stay 
KAVANAUGH:  I just want Senator, I just want to be clear. I want to reassure you.  
LEAHY:  I'm going to go into it. I'm going to give you a chance to speak a lot more 
GRASSLEY:  Without 
LEAHY:  but let me 
GRASSLEY:  Hey, I'm not going to take time away from you, but I want to explain something. I said yesterday that if a question is asked within the 30 minutes that he can finish the question and it can be answered. So he did not go over his time.  
LEAHY:  OK, sorry. I didn't mean to hit a sensitive area. Let me ask you this. Between 2 
       
      Between 2001 I'm new here.  
       
LEAHY:  Between 2001 and 2003, two Republican staffers on this Committee regularly hacked into the private computer files of six Democratic senators, including mine. These Republican staffers stole 4,670 files and they used them to assist in getting President Bush's most controversial judicial nominees confirmed.  
      Now, the theft by these Republican staffers became public in late 2003 when the Wall Street Journal happened to print some of the stolen materials. The ringleader behind this massive theft was a Republican staffer named Manny Miranda, who had worked for one of the members of this committee.  
      In a way was considered by many, both Republicans and Democrats, as a digital Watergate. Not a theft not unlike what the Russians did in hacking the DNC. Now, during all this, you worked hand-in-hand in the White House with Manny Miranda to advance these same nominees were he was stealing material. Not surprisingly, you were asked extensively about your knowledge of this theft during both your 2004, 2006 hearings.  
      And I don't use the word extensively lightly. You were asked over 100 questions from six senators, both Republicans and Democrats and you testified and you testified repeatedly that you never received any stolen materials, you knew nothing about it until it was public. You testified that if you had suspected anything untoward, you would have reported it to the White House counsel who would have raised it with Senator Hatch, especially as Mr. Miranda had worked for him.  
      And at the time, we left it there. We didn't know any better. Today, with the very limited amount of your White House record that has been provided to this committee and it is limited for the first time, we've been able to learn about your relationship with Mr. Miranda and your knowledge of these events.  
      So my question is this:  Did Mr. Miranda ever provide you with highly specific information regarding what I or other Democratic senators were planning on asking certain judicial nominees?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, let me contextualize because I'm looking at what you're putting up here first..  
LEAHY:  Well, the question 
KAVANAUGH:  That that what's up there is 100 percent accurate. As my memory.  
LEAHY:  OK. So let me ask you this. That's 
KAVANAUGH:  Never knew or suspected, true. Never suspected anything untoward, true. Had I suspected something untoward I would have talked to Judge Gonzales 
LEAHY:  And I've already 
KAVANAUGH:  Would have talked to Senator Hatch. That that's all 100 percent true.  
LEAHY:  And that's what I had already said. But did Mr. Miranda ever provide you with highly specific information regarding what I or other Democratic senators were planning in the future to ask certain judicial nominees?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, one of the things we would do at the White House is on judicial nominations and I'm coming to your answer but I want to explain is to meet up here and this happens on both sides all the time with teams up here about OK, their judicial nominations are our judicial nominees are coming up, how are we going to get them through, here's a hearing coming up.  
      And during those meetings, of course it would be discussed, "well I think here's what Senator Leahy's going to be interested in." That's a that's very common. I'm sure in President Obama's administration when they had similar meetings, they would probably have meetings and say, well I think this is what Senator Graham will be interested in. That's what you do in meetings with so highly specific would I think I'm not sure what you're getting at by highly specific 
LEAHY:  Judge, I I I've been here over 40 years, I know I know what both Republican and Democratic administrations do in preparing. I'm not asking about that. I'm asking you why, before this, did Mr. Miranda send you an e-mail asking you in on July 19, 2002, asking you and another Bush Official why the Leahy people were looking into financial ties between two special interest groups and, Priscilla Owen, a particular controversial nominee to the fifth circuit. You had handled that Owen nomination, as you know, as a judge she had received a lot of contributions.  
      Did did Mr. Miranda send you an e-mail asking you why the Leahy people were looking after her financial ties?  
KAVANAUGH:  Is that what this e-mail is?  
LEAHY:  I'm just asking.  
KAVANAUGH:  Can I take a minute to read it?  
LEAHY:  Of course.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK.  
LEAHY:  And this is it was four days before her hearing on July 23.  
KAVANAUGH:  Did I send any of the e-mails on this chain? I don't think so. I'm CC'd or in any event, if if he said why are the Leahy people looking into this from Manny Miranda I don't really have a specific recollection of any of this, Senator, but it would have been it would have not have been at all unusual for and this happens all the time, I think, which is the Leahy people 
LEAHY:  Really?  
KAVANAUGH:  Are looking into this and the Hatch people are looking into that.  
LEAHY:  Well 
KAVANAUGH:  I I think.  
LEAHY:  You say all the time. Two days before the hearing, he told you that the Democrats were passing around a related 60 Minutes story. He said his intel, intelligence, suggests that Leahy will focus on all things money.  
      Well, that appears to come from a stolen e-mail to me, stolen by the Republican staff member, sent to me the night before and then given to you the next morning. Were you aware that you were getting, from Mr. Miranda, stolen e-mails?  
KAVANAUGH:  Not at all, Senator. It was part of what appeared to be standard discussion about it's common, Senator, for at the White House it'd be common to hear from our leg. affairs team. This is in fact, in this process, it's common to hear this is what Senator X is interested in, this is what Senator Y's going to focus 
LEAHY:  Was it common to have copies of a private e-mail sent to a particular senator?  
KAVANAUGH:  Copies of a private e-mail sent to a particular senator?  
LEAHY:  Yes. Wouldn't that jump out at you? For example 
KAVANAUGH:  What what what are you referring to?  
LEAHY:  Well, Mr. Miranda is telling you about e-mails sent to me the night before. There'd be no way that he would even have that unless he stole it. Did that raise any question in your mind?  
KAVANAUGH:  Did he refer to that e-mail in this?  
LEAHY:  Yes.  
KAVANAUGH:  Where where is that, Senator?  
LEAHY:  I'll let you read it.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I'm not seeing where you're I'm not seeing what you're referring to.  
LEAHY:  Yes, it's not here.  
      OK, well let me take you one that you do have, because you do have this information from Mr. Miranda and the the very limited amount of material that the Republicans are allowing to see of your information about you, that at least did come through.  
      But in January 2003, let me go with something very specific, Mr. Miranda forwarded you a letter from me and other Judiciary Democrats to then Majority LAeader Tom Daschle. The letter was clearly a draft, it had typos and it wasn't signed.  
      Somebody eventually we never put it out, but somebody eventually leaked its existence to Fox News, I'm not sure who, I could guess. It was a private letter, the time I was shocked to learn of its existence, it had been leaked.  
      But here's the thing, you had the full text of my letter in your inbox before anything had been said about it publicly. Did you find it at all unusual to receive a draft letter from Democratic senators to each other before any mention of it was made public?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, the only thing I said on the e-mail exchange, if I'm looking at it correctly, Senator, was who signed this? Which would imply that I thought it was a signed letter.  
LEAHY:  It was sent to you, were you surprised to get it? I mean it's obviously a draft, it's got typos and and everything else in it. Were you surprised the draft letter circulated among Democrats ended up in your inbox?  
KAVANAUGH:  But 
LEAHY:  From Mr. Miranda.  
KAVANAUGH:  I think the premise of your question is not accurately describing my apparent recollection or understanding of the time, because I wouldn't have said who signed this if it was a if I thought it was a draft.  
      And my e-mail says who signed this?  
LEAHY:  So you didn't realize what you had was a stolen letter signed by signed by me, that you had a letter that had not been sent to anybody, not been made public?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, all I see that I said was who signed this? That's all I see.  
LEAHY:  Well, let me ask you some more, because so much of this came from Mr. Miranda, who was a Republican staffer, who was as we now know, stealing things. Did he ever ask to meet privately with you in an offsite location somewhere other than the White House on Capital Hill?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think sometimes, Senator, that the meetings with Senate staffers and White House and Justice Department 
LEAHY:  I'm just asking about one particular one, Mr. Miranda.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, sometimes usually it would be either at the White House or the Senate. But I think sometimes we'd meet or DOJ, but sometimes it could be somewhere else.  
LEAHY:  Well, did he ask to meet with you privately so he could give you information about Senator Biden and Senator Feinstein?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm not remembering anything specific, but that's certainly possible. And again, Senator, I just want to be clear here because I it's very common when you're in judicial selection process to determine what are all the senators interested in for an upcoming nominee or an upcoming hearing.  
      That is the coin of the realm, Senator X is interested in focusing on administrative law, Senator Y is going to ask about environmental law, senator is concerned about your past work for this client.  
      And that's very common kind of discussion 
LEAHY:  Did he did he ever ask to have you meet him not the White House, not at the capital, but at his home?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't remember that.  
LEAHY:  OK. Did he ever ask to meet you outside of the White House or the capital?  
KAVANAUGH:  I can't rule that out, but again, that wouldn't have been typical.  
LEAHY:  Did he did he ever hand you material separately from what would be e-mailed back and forth?  
KAVANAUGH:  Not remembering what you're if you're referring to something in particular, I could answer that. But 
       
LEAHY:  Let me ask you this, did you ever receive information via Mr. Miranda, information marked confidential that you informed you what my staff was sharing with other Democrats?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't know the answer to that, Senator. But again, people on the it's not always the case, at least my understanding, that the that the people on, for example, your staff and Senator Hatch's staff were necessarily working at odds.  
      It seemed like a lot of times the staff was cooperating at times, not at other times obviously, but at times about judicial nominations. And so it wouldn't have raised anything in particular in my mind if we learned oh, Senator Leahy's concerned about this.  
LEAHY:  Did my staff ever send you confidential material from Senator Hatch that was stolen from his e-mails?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, not the not not the last part, but the your I certainly did talk to your staff when we were working on the airline bill, on the September 20, 2001 airline bill, I did remember being here all night one night with your staff, and I'm sure we did talk that night about what other senators thought, and that was the airline bill where, as you I think you recall, Speaker Hastert was involved, and we were out there with the OMB team. So in that I worked hard with your staff on that.  
      It just struck me as very as not uncommon at all to be talking with our alleged team about what senators on both sides think. It didn't strike me that it was always arms camps.  
LEAHY:  But no, and often times it was not, but here you're getting obviously very private Democratic e-mails. You weren't concerned how Mr. Miranda got them?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I guess I'm not sure about your premise.  
LEAHY:  Were you at all concerned about where Mr. Miranda got some of the material he was showing you?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't recall that, but on the premise of your last question, I want to I want to step back to that, not sure I agree with the premise.  
LEAHY:  I'm just saying, if you're getting something that's marked confidential, wouldn't you assume that's not something being shared back and forth?  
KAVANAUGH:  Unless it was shared. I mean, this is the thing, if a staffer said here's what we're sending to you you all should be aware of this, because we're going to make a we're going to be really opposed to this judicial nominee.  
      It seemed so just to be clear, it seemed to be sometimes there were judicial nominees you were very opposed to, sometimes you were supportive of and sometimes in between and there would be messages passed back and forth and sharing of information, very cooperative, as I recall.  
LEAHY:  Well, I've I've 
KAVANAUGH:  You were transparent, in other words, when you are when you had problems with the nominees, I recall, transparency. And when you were supportive, you were at the May 09, 2001 event at the White House, I recall, where the president announced his first 11 Court of Appeals nominees. And you you were supportive of many of them.  
LEAHY:  Well, as you know but, you know, as a fact, I I voted for a lot of Republican nominees.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
LEAHY:  Both to the Supreme Court, the Courts of Appeals, and the District Court.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
LEAHY:  But what I'm opposed on my with Judge Owen when I was raising some very good questions about funding issues getting from people that were before her court. That might've raised a red flag that I had some concerns about her. Now, when you worked at the White House, did anyone ever tell you they had a mole that provided them with secret information related to nominations?  
KAVANAUGH:  I I don't recall the reference to a mole which sounds, highly, specific. But, certainly, it is common, again, the people behind you can probably refer to this, but it's common, I think, for everyone to talk to each other at times, and share information. At least, this is was my experience. This was 20 years ago, almost, where you would talk to people 
LEAHY:  So, you 
KAVANAUGH:  and the committee.  
LEAHY:  you never received an e-mail from a Republican staff member with information claiming to come from spying from a Democratic mole?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't I'm not going to rule anything out, senator. But if if I did, I wouldn't of thought that anything I wouldn't have thought that the literal meaning of that, but I'd.  
LEAHY:  Wouldn't it surprise you that if you got an e-mail saying you got that from somebody spying on Democrats?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, is there such an e-mail, Senator? I don't know. I mean, that's.  
LEAHY:  Well, we'd have to ask the Chairman what he has in his confidential 
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
LEAHY:  material.  
       
KAVANAUGH:  But but here's the if you're referring to something particular. Here's what I know.  
GRASSLEY:  Just stop a minute here. Referenced twice in your 30 minutes and don't take this off of his time. You made reference. This you're talking about the period of time that he was the White House Counsel.  
LEAHY:  Yes.  
GRASSLEY:  That material is available to everybody.  
LEAHY:  So so so, that material about him that's marked committee confidential is now public and available? Is that what you're saying? If that's what the Chairman say 
GRASSLEY:  No.  
LEAHY:  we've got a whole new series of questions.  
GRASSLEY:  No. Not if it 
       
GRASSLEY:  not if it's committee confidential, but you have 
LEAHY:  So, it's not available?  
GRASSLEY:  you have access to it.  
LEAHY:  Not so that I can ask 
       
GRASSLEY:  But don't forget, 80 percent of the material we've gotten from the library is is on the website of the Judiciary Committee. So, the public has access to it.  
LEAHY:  No, I I.  
GRASSLEY:  Proceed.  
LEAHY:  I want I want Judge Kavanaugh to have access so that we can ask him these questions 
GRASSLEY:  Well.  
LEAHY:  under oath, and he can see them. So, I would ask the and not around, but I would ask the Chairman if he might look at some of these that are marked committee confidential which limits the ability of us to ask you, specifically, and hand you the specific e-mails.  
      But I would state 
GRASSLEY:  Let me.  
LEAHY:  on what has been public.  
GRASSLEY:  Let me answer that for you. There's only one Democratic senator asked for access to that. Senator Klobuchar got it. If you're interested in it, you could've been asking ever since August the 25, I believe.  
LEAHY:  We've been asking to have that those made public. And I don't I'm not as interested if I see this in a closed room where I can't talk about it. I want Judge Kavanaugh to see the e-mails which came from Mr. Miranda, and 
GRASSLEY:  Yes, give us a citation of the documents and we'll get them for you.  
KAVANAUGH:  That testimony up there is true, 100 percent.  
FEINSTEIN:  Can somebody read it? I can't see it. What?  
LEAHY:  Well. Of course, it would be helpful if we allowed the National Archives time to complete their review.  
KAVANAUGH:  But I just want to reassure you, senator, because you're asking important questions. I want to reassure you that what you've got up on the board is 100 percent accurate.  
FEINSTEIN:  Can somebody move it so we can see it here?  
LEAHY:  Well, I I am concerned because there is evidence that Mr. Miranda provided you with materials that were stolen from me. And that would contradict your prior testimony.  
      It's also clear from public e-mails, and I'm restraining from not going into the non-public ones, that you had reason to believe materials were obtained inappropriately at the time.  
      Now, Mr. Chairman, there are, at least, six documents that you consider committee confidential that are directly related to this. Just like the three documents that I shared that are already public, these other six contain no personal information, no presidential records restricted material.  
      There is, simply, no reason they can't be made public. I hope they will be before this next round. You know, it is difficult when to ask a question, I have to ask the Republicans, will you allow me to ask the question?  
      I, certainly, never did that. I wouldn't when I was Chairman. Now, I asked you in 2006 whether you had seen any documents relating to President Bush's NSA warrantless wire tapping program, or whether you heard anything about it.  
      You answered, you learned about it with the rest of us in December, 2005, when the New York Times reported it.  
      Now, I know it's been 12 years. So, here's a video of your sworn testimony. It should be on the TV screens.  
       
LEAHY:  Any documents relating to the president's NSA warrantless wire tapping program?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I learned of that program when there was New York Times story when the reports of that program when there was a New York Times story that came over the wire I think on a Thursday night in mid December of of last year.  
LEAHY:  You had not seen anything or had you heard anything about it prior to the New York Times article?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
LEAHY:  Nothing at all?  
KAVANAUGH:  Nothing at all.  
       
LEAHY:  Mr. Chair.  
KAVANAUGH:  Mr. Chairman, can I 
LEAHY:  Can I 
       
GRASSLEY:  Can I again, don't take this time away from him. Now, as far as I know, in 15 hearings so, I'm going to read something in just a minute, but preface it with this. As far as I know, in 15 hearings that I've been involved in, of Supreme Court justices, there's never been such a video shown.  
      So, since this is presidential, I want to read this. The use of a video at a confirmation is highly irregular, but I see no reason why my colleagues can't use a video that was provided by the nominee himself in response to the Senate questionnaire.  
GRASSLEY:  I've been assured that the video is from Judge Kavanaugh's submission to the committee. Based on this assurance, we've allowed this video to be shown. But I want to emphasize that I expect that video to be used fairly. The video clip should not be presented in a way that deprives it of relevant context. This is consistent with requirements in federal court. That's why I will insist that Judge Kavanaugh have the opportunity before he answers this question to request if any additional video be played if it provided appropriate context.  
      So Judge Kavanaugh, I would ask you do you believe that more context is needed to be able to address the question?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I don't think I've heard the question yet, but I'll let you know when I hear the question.  
LEAHY:  Let me ask you this. I'll repeat the question I asked before. You said you heard about this with the rest of us in December of 2005. You said on there that you had no knowledge of anything related to this until the New York Times article.  
      Now we have a declassified inspector general report that on September '17, which was before the several months before the New York Times article, John Yoo issued a memo on surveillance of the White House that helped form the legal underpinnings of the NSA warrantless wiretapping program.  
      When you were in the White House in 2001, did you ever work with John Yoo on the constitutional implications of a warrantless surveillance program?  
KAVANAUGH:  We're talking about a lot of different things, Senator, here.  
LEAHY:  Warrantless surveillance program.  
KAVANAUGH:  And that's talking about a lot of different things. So what you're asking about right there was the specific what President Bush called the Terrorist Surveillance Program. That was his name for it.  
LEAHY:  Which is a warrantless surveillance program.  
KAVANAUGH:  Along with many others, and that's you were asking me about the Terrorist Surveillance Program, TSP I think you called. He that story was broken. That testimony's 100 percent accurate. That story was broken in the New York Times. I had not been read into that program.  
      And when it came in the New York Times, I actually still remember my exact reaction when I read that story. And then the president that Saturday, I believe, did a live radio address to explain to the country what that program was about. There was a huge controversy. And so, everyone was then working on getting the speech together.  
      And you asked me if I had learned about it before then. I said no, and that's accurate.  
LEAHY:  OK, when you were in the White House, did you every work with John Yoo on the constitutional implications of any warrantless surveillance program?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I can't rule that. Right in the wake of September 11th, it was all hands on deck on all fronts, and then we were farming out assignments, but we were all involved.  
      On September 12th when we came in let's just back up. On September 12th when we came into the White House, it was we have to work on everything. So then overtime, people figured out what issues they were going to work on.  
      The airline bill that I was up here on September 20th when the President Bush spoke to Congress that night as you recall, and then after that we were in the meeting room together, you and I and others, working on the airline bill. But there were all sorts of other things going on. The Patriot Act was going on.  
LEAHY:  I know. I was involved with all of those 
KAVANAUGH:  Yes 
LEAHY:  I remember the discussions, but what I want to know did you ever raise questions about warrantless surveillance?  
KAVANAUGH:  I can't rule anything out like that. There was so much going on in the wake of September 11th, Senator, as you recall up here, too, but in the White House in particular and in the councils office in particular, we had eight lawyers in there eight or nine as I recall, and there were so many issues to consider for the president and for the legal team.  
      And those issues, like I said, for President Bush, every day for the next seven years was September 12th, 2001. For the legal team, there was a lot 
LEAHY:  For a lot of us, it was.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
LEAHY:  But I Mr. Chairman, I sent a letter to you along with Senators Feinstein and Durbin on August 16th of this year asking if we made documents related to this issue public.  
      Without them being public, it's not fair to me and it's not fair to Judge Kavanaugh that I can't hand him the actual documents which I would think would refresh his memory, and I would I ask again if we could look at the before my next turn; can we make those public?  
GRASSLEY:  You tell us what documents you want and I'll make them available to you, but I can say that they can be made public. Just as I said last year during Justice Gorsuch's confirmation, I put a process in place that will allow my colleagues to obtain the public release of confidential documents for use during the hearing. All I ask was my colleagues to identify the documents they intended to use and I would work to get the Department of Justice and former President Bush to agree to waive restrictions on the documents.  
      Senator Feinstein secured the public release of 19 documents last year under this process and Senator Klobuchar secured the release of four documents this year. If my colleagues truly believe that other Committee confidential documents should have been made public, they never told me about that. So 
LEAHY:  Well 
GRASSLEY:  let us know what you want, and then you can go ahead and we'll get them for you.  
LEAHY:  I want the same thing that I requested in August on August 16th because it's directly relevant to Judge Kavanaugh's testimony. Directly relevant to his to the questions I've been asking here, directly relevant to his own e-mails with John Yoo. So I would before my next turn, we could take a look at that.  
GRASSLEY:  OK, well we'll get them for you for your next turn tomorrow.  
LEAHY:  Now, you said everyone agrees the pardon power gives the president absolute, unfettered, unchecked power to pardon every violator of every federal law for the president issue a pardon in exchange for a bribe. Yes or no?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I think that question has been litigated before, and I don't want to comment about anything 
LEAHY:  Let me ask you this 
       
KAVANAUGH:  pardon. scope about there are couple things involved in that question. One is what's the scope what's the effect of the pardon? And the other question is can you be separately charged with the bribery crime, both the briber and the bribee? And those are two distinct questions.  
LEAHY:  No, I understand.  
KAVANAUGH:  You'd want to keep those two questions separate in thinking about how the hypothetical 
LEAHY:  Then in that, the Mr. Chairman, you know, I got interrupted an awful lot during my 
GRASSLEY:  OK, but I 
LEAHY:  I just want to finish this question.  
GRASSLEY:  But I made sure that if the timer didn't treat we'll give him another minute.  
LEAHY:  Thank you.  
       
      God bless you. I'll be forever thankful.  
       
      President Trump claims he has an absolute right to pardon himself. Does he?  
KAVANAUGH:  The question of self-pardons is something I have never analyzed. It's a question that I have not written about, it's a question, therefore, that's a hypothetical question that I can't begin to 
LEAHY:  What about 
KAVANAUGH:  Answer in this context as a sitting judge and as a nominee to the Supreme Court.  
LEAHY:  And the other half of that is the obvious one. Does the President have the ability to pardon somebody in exchange for a promise from that person they wouldn't testify against him?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I'm not going to answer hypothetical questions of that sort. And the reason there's a good reason for it. When when we get when judges don't when we decide, we get briefs and arguments of the parties, we have a record, we have an appendix with all of the information, we have amicus briefs and then I I never I never decide anything alone.  
      I'm in a panel of three, and if I'm confirmed to the Supreme Court I'd be on a team of nine.  
LEAHY:  Thank thank you Mr. Chairman and I hope for the sake of the country that remains a hypothetical question. Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  And since I gave you an extra minute, I'm not going to let you reserve the 25 seconds.  
       
LEAHY:  I'm done.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Senator Graham?  
GRAHAM:  Thank you very much. July the 21st, 1993, I certainly don't want you to have to lay out a test here in the abstract, which might determine what your vote or your test would be in a case you have yet to see that may well come before the Supreme Court.  
      That was wise counsel by Senator Leahy in the Ginsburg confirmation. Very directly, did you ever knowingly participate in stealing anything from Senator Leahy or any other Senator?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
GRAHAM:  Did you ever know that you were dealing with anything that was stolen property?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
GRAHAM:  As to the terrorist surveillance program, did you help create this program?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
GRAHAM:  Did you give legal advice about it?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
GRAHAM:  Thank you.  
KAVANAUGH:  We're referring to the same program I was talking about 
GRAHAM:  Yes, yes, the one that the article was about. So a bit of a kind of a run through here. You're probably going to get 55 votes I don't know, 54 to 56 or 57, I don't know what the number will be. There are 11 undecided Senators before the hearing.  
      Three of them are Republicans and I like your chances. Eight of them are Democrat. You're going to play with about five or six of them, and I just want you and your family to know that in other times, someone like you would probably get 90 votes.  
      I want your daughters to know that what happened yesterday is unique to the times that we live in, and I want to give you a chance to say some things to the people that attended this hearing. I think there's a father of a Parkland student who was killed.  
      I think there's a mother of a child who has got terrible health care problems, and there are many other people here with personal situations. What would you like to say to them, if anything, about your job as a Supreme Court Justice?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I understand the real world effects of our decisions. In my job as a Judge for the last 12 years, I've gone out of my way in my opinions and at oral arguments, if you listen to oral arguments, to make clear to everyone before me that I understand the situation, the circumstances, the facts.  
      For example, as I was saying to Senator Feinstein earlier in the Heller II case about the facts in D.C. And I want to reassure everyone that I base my decisions on the law, but I do so with an awareness of the facts and an awareness of the real world consequences.  
      And I have not lived in a bubble and I understand how passionately people feel about particular issues, and I understand how personally people are affected by issues. And I understand the difficulties that people have in America.  
      I understand, for example well to start, I understand the situation of homeless people, because I see them on a regular basis when I'm serving meals and 
GRAHAM:  So tell me about that, what interaction do you have with homeless people?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator I I regularly serve meals at Catholic Charities at 10th and G with Father John Enzler, who's the head of Catholic Charities D.C., and I've known since I was nine years old when I was an altar boy, he was at Little Flower Parish.  
      And what you learn when you're at I said I'm a Matthew 25, trying to follow the the lesson of serving the least fortunate among us. You know, when I was hungry, you gave me food; thirsty, you gave me a drink; stranger and you welcomed me; naked and you clothed me; sick and you cared for me, imprisoned and you visited me.  
      Six six groups that that's not exclusive, but that's a good place to start with your charitable works in your private time.  
GRAHAM:  So describe the difference between Brett Kavanaugh the man and Brett Kavanaugh the Judge.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well as a as a man, I'm trying to do what I can in community service, as a dad, as a coach, as a volunteer, as a teacher, as a husband and serving meals to the homeless. The one thing, Senator you you know, we're all God's children, we're all equal.  
      People have gotten there because maybe they have a mental illness, maybe they had a terrible family situation, maybe they didn't have anyone to care for them, maybe they lost a job and had no family, but every person you serve a meal to is just as good as as me or better, frankly, because they've what they've had to go through on a daily basis just to get a meal.  
      And you talk to them that's the other thing. When you're walking by the street, you see people and I understand, I'm sure I've done this, I'm not I don't want to sound better than someone in describing this, but you know you you don't necessarily look and you don't say how how's it going, right?  
      But when you serve meals to them and you talk to people who are homeless and they are just as human and just as good a people as as all of us, and they're you know we're all a part of one community. And so I think about that and you know I'm going to I don't want to sound like I'm I can always do more and more and do better, I know I fall short.  
      But Father John has been a big influence on that, in thinking about others. So that's as a as a person, I try to do Washington Jesuit Academy, so I tutor up there. I'm now on the board of Washington Jesuit Academy, that's a little different situation.  
OK, those are low income boys from low income families. Tuition free school, one of these 7:30 a.m. to 7 schools, and I started tutoring up there because I wanted to do some more tutoring, and just be involved more. I mean, judging's important, but I wanted to be more directly involved in the community.  
KAVANAUGH:  And they had tutoring you do all your homework there, because there was the situation you don't want to go home and have anything else to do. You get three meals there and you do your homework there, and to help them do their homework. And you see these great kids and they're in a structured environment and you make an effect in their lives.  
      And and like I said yesterday, the teachers and coaches throughout America, they change lives and for me to be able to participate, you know, you you can't change everything at once, but just changing one life one meal one day at the shelter or one one kid that that remembers something you said in a tutoring program, you know, if we all did that more and I fall short too, I know. And I want to do more on that front, but you can make a big difference in people's in people's lives.  
      I'd just bring that into the judging, I think I judge based on the law but how does that effect me as a as a judge? I think I first of all, just standing in the shoes of others. We could all be that homeless person, we could all be that kid who needs a more structured educational environment. And one of things I was taught by my mom, but also I remember Chris Abell, my sixth grade English teacher religion teacher and football coach and baseball coach, one of his and he drove me to school one of his and he's now on the board of Washington Jesuit Academy with me but one of his lessons in "To Kill A Mockingbird" was to stand in the shoes of others.  
      And I still have the "To Kill A Mockingbird" that we used in sixth grade. It's in my chambers still, the same copy. And 
GRAHAM:  Is it fair to say that your job as a judge is to not so much stand in the shoes of somebody you're sympathetic to but stand in the shoes of the law?  
KAVANAUGH:  You're in the shoes of the law but with awareness of the impacts of your decisions.  
GRAHAM:  Right.  
KAVANAUGH:  And that's what that's the critical distinction. You can't be unaware. When you write an opinion, how's it going to affect people?  
GRAHAM:  Right.  
KAVANAUGH:  And understand try to explain. I think 
GRAHAM:  Right.  
KAVANAUGH:  you know, it's explaining is such an important feature. And then when people come into the courtroom and how you treat litigants. So we are we're all familiar we've all been in courtrooms where the judge is acting a little too full of being a judge and to well, we've all been there. I try not to do that. Can't say I'm perfect, but I try to make sure the litigants understand that I I get it.  
      Whether it's a criminal defendant case we had a pro se case pro se case where a litigant comes in and argues pro se in our court, which rarely happens in our court where the pro se actually argues. And it was a guy who said he been called the N-word by a supervisor. And he's arguing pro se, and the question is whether in a single instance of the N-word constitutes racial harassment under the civil rights laws. And I wrote a separate opinion explaining yes, a single instance of the N-word does constitute a racially hostile work environment.  
      And I explained in doing that, I explained the history of racism in this country and that and how that word no other word in English language so powerfully or instantly calls to mind our country's long and brutal struggle against racism I wrote in that opinion. And I cited "To Kill A Mockingbird" in that opinion, among other things. But what I wanted to make clear by bringing this example up is I understood his situation.  
      I tried to understand what that would would be like and I decided the case based on the law, but I understood and what the pro se litigant. The point being I always try to be aware of the facts and circumstances.  
GRAHAM:  Have you have you have you ever made a legal decision that personally was upsetting to you?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I'm sure I have and that's what Justice Kennedy talked about in Texas versus Johnson. That that case, in case people didn't know what I was referring to in Texas versus Johnson, that's the flag burning case. And Justice Kennedy is in the majority with Justice Scalia and Justice Brennan, Justice Marshall and and says that law against flag burning is unconstitutional under the First Amendment. And that obviously tore Justice Kennedy you know, it really bothered him because he's such a patriot.  
      But he still ruled the way he did because he read the First Amendment to compel that result and that's why wrote that great concurrence in that case. And that that concurrence is such a great model for judging and a great model of independence and a great model, to your point, Senator Graham, of we follow the law but we're aware we're aware. And you're a better judge if you're aware.  
GRAHAM:  Well, I would just want to say this to to my colleagues. Everything he said I think has been verified by the people who know him the best. I can't say I've read 307 of your opinions. I can tell you without hesitation I have not. I did not read Sotomayor opinions or Kagan's writings. But what I chose to do was look at the people who knew them the best. And I think Bob Bennett, who defended President Clinton during impeachment I knew him very well said that Brett is a judge's judge, someone doing his absolute best to follow the law rather than his policy preferences.  
      Brett is an all-star in both his professional and his personal life. I have yet to find anybody that I find credible, really anybody at all that would suggest that you are unfair to litigants. I have yet to find a colleague that thought you were a politician in a robe. But you are a Republican, is that true?  
KAVANAUGH:  I I register 
GRAHAM:  Was a OK.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
GRAHAM:  The only reason I glad to hear you say that it makes makes a lot of sense, given who you work for.  
KAVANAUGH:  I I haven't well, I'll let you finish your question.  
GRAHAM:  Well, you work for a lot of Republicans 
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
GRAHAM:  like the president, who was a Republican. So 
KAVANAUGH:  President Bush 
GRAHAM:  Yes.  
KAVANAUGH:  I worked for, yes.  
GRAHAM:  Yes. So that's that's all fine 

GRAHAM:  So I remember 

GRAHAM:  I remember 

       
GRAHAM:  I'll tell you what I remember when she leaves.  
      So I asked Elena Kagan about a statement that Greg Craig made. You know Greg Craig by any chance?  
KAVANAUGH:  I I've met him. I haven't seen him in many years, but yes.  

GRAHAM:  He was the one of the defenders of President Clinton during the impeachment hearing.  

      And somewhere in here I've got Greg Craig's statement about Kagan.  
       
GRAHAM:  No, I'm looking for Greg Craig's statement. Here we go. Here's what "Kagan was a progressive in the mold of Obama himself." "Elena Kagan is clearly a legal progressive and comes from the progressive side of the spectrum," according to Ronald Klein. The first was Greg Craig. And I had an exchange with Justice Kagan when she was the nominee. I'm not trying to trick you. I don't have anything on Greg.  
GRAHAM:  He said on May 16th that you're largely progressive in the mold of Obama himself. Do you agree with that? Mrs. Kagan:  "Senator Graham, you know in terms of my political views, I've been a Democrat all my life. I worked for two Democrat presidents, and that is what my political views are." And I asked would you consider your political views progressive, Mrs. Kagan:  "My political views are generally progressive," which is true. I really appreciate what she said, because I expect President Obama to go to someone like Elena Kagan, who is progressive, shares his general view of judging, and who happened to be highly qualified.  
      Sotomayor President Obama nominated Sotomayor because he wanted someone whose philosophy of judging was his, which, as applied to the law and Constitutional principles, was be ready to adopt them to a modern context. So President Obama nominated Sotomayor because he wanted someone whose philosophy of judging was his.   
      I expect that to happen. If Donald Trump is president in 2020, he'll be our next president. If it's somebody else, I expect that to happen.  
      To my colleagues on the other side, what do you really expect? You should celebrate, even though you don't vote for him and I don't know why you wouldn't the quality of the man chosen by President Obama. Elena Kagan and Sotomayor came from the progressive wing of the judging world, and of legal thought. They're absolutely highly-qualified, good, decent people, and they got see if I can find vote totals Ms. Kagan got 63 votes, and Sonia Sotomayor got 68.   
      It's going to bother me that you don't get those numbers. But what bothers me is they should have gotten 90. They should have gotten 95. Anthony Kennedy got 97. Anthony Antonin Scalia got 98. Ruth Bader Ginsburg got 96. So what's happened?   
      Between then and now, advise and consent has taken on a different meaning. It used to be the understanding of this body that elections have consequences, and you would expect the president, who won the election, to pick somebody of their philosophy.   
      I promise you that when Strom Thurmond voted for Ruth Bader Ginsburg, he did not agree with her legal philosophy, and I doubt if Senator Leahy agreed with Justice Scalia. Senator Leahy has voted for a lot of Republicans. I have voted for everyone presented since I have been here, because I find them to be highly-qualified, coming from backgrounds I would expect the president in question to choose from.  
      So as to your qualifications, how long have you been a judge?  
KAVANAUGH:  I've been judge for 12 years.   
GRAHAM:  How many opinions have you written?  
KAVANAUGH:  I have written over 300 opinions.   
GRAHAM:  OK. Do you think there's a lot we can learn from those opinions, if we spent time looking at them?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, I am very proud of my opinions, and I as I mentioned, I tell people, "Don't just read about the opinions. Read the opinions." I'm very proud of them.  
GRAHAM:  You were nominated by President Trump on July the 9th, my birthday, which I thought was a pretty good birthday present for somebody who thinks like I do and I think that may have something to do with that at 9 o'clock. By 9:23, Chuck Schumer says, "I will oppose Judge Kavanaugh." By 9:25, Senator Harris:  "Trump Supreme Court Justice Nominee Judge Kavanaugh represents a direct and fundamental threat to the rights and healthcare of hundreds of millions of America Americans. I will oppose his nomination." Elizabeth Warren, at 9:55:  "President Brett Kavanaugh's record as a judge and lawyer is clear:  hostile to healthcare for millions, opposed to the CFPB, corporate accountability, thinks President Trump is above the law." On and on and on. Nancy Pelosi at 10:11, Bernie Sanders at 10:18:  "If Brett Kavanaugh is confirmed to the Supreme Court, it will have profoundly negative effect on workers' rights, women's rights and voting rights for the decades to come."  
      All I can say within an hour and 18 minutes of your nomination, you became the biggest threat to democracy in the eyes of some of the most partisan people in the country who would hold Kagan and Sotomayor up as highly qualified, and would challenge any Republican dare vote against them.  
      You live in unusual times, as I do. You should get more than 90 votes, but you won't, and I am sorry it has gotten to where it has. It's got nothing to do about you.  
      If you don't mind, and you don't have to, what did you tell your children yesterday about the hearing?  
KAVANAUGH:  They did as they I'll I'll tell them what they told me. I don't think I'll they gave me a big hug and said, "Good job, Daddy." And Margaret, before she went to bed, made a special trip down and said, "Give me a special hug."  
GRAHAM:  I just wish if we could have a hearing where the the nominee's kids could show up. Is that asking too much?   

GRAHAM:  So what kind of country have we become? None of this happened just a couple years ago. It's getting worse and worse and worse, and all of us have a an obligations to try to correct it where we can.   
      Roe v. Wade are you familiar with the case?  
KAVANAUGH:  I am, Senator.  
       
GRAHAM:  Yeah. Can you, in 30 seconds, give me the general holding of Roe v. Wade?  
KAVANAUGH:  As elaborated upon in Planned Parenthood vs. Casey, a woman has a Constitutional right, as interpreted by the Supreme Court, in the Constitution to obtain an abortion up to the point of viability, subject to reasonable regulations by the state, so long as those reasonable regulations do not constitute an undue burden on the woman's right.  
GRAHAM:  OK. As to how the system works, can you sit down with five you and four other judges, and overrule Roe v. Wade just because you want to?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, Roe v. Wade's an important precedent of the Supreme Court; been reaffirmed 
GRAHAM:  Don't you have to have a case, as of I mean, you just can't 
KAVANAUGH:  Yeah.  
GRAHAM:  I "What are you what are you doing for lunch?" "Let's overrule Roe v. Wade."   
KAVANAUGH:  I I I 
GRAHAM:  It doesn't work that way, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  I I see what you're asking, Senator. Right, there's there's the way cases come up to us in that context, or in other contexts, would be a law's passed 
GRAHAM:  Can I give you yeah. Can I give you an example, because I can do this quicker?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
GRAHAM:  So some state somewhere, or some town somewhere passes a law that runs into the face of Roe. Somebody will object. They will go to lower courts, and eventually it might come up to the Supreme Court, challenging the foundations of Roe v. Wade. It would take some legislative enactment for that happen, is that correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.   
GRAHAM:  If there was such a action by a state or a local government challenging Roe and it came before the Supreme Court, would you listen to both sides?  
KAVANAUGH:  I listen to both sides in every case, Senator. I have for 12 years, yes.   
GRAHAM:  When it comes to overruling a long-standing precedent of the court, is there a formula that you use?   
KAVANAUGH:  There 
GRAHAM:  Analysis?  
KAVANAUGH:  So first of all, you start with the notion of precedent and as I've said to Senator Feinstein in this context, this is a precedent that's been re-affirmed many times over 45 years, including in Planned Parenthood versus Casey, where they specifically consider whether to overrule and re-affirmed and applied all of the stare decisis factors that importantly became precedent on precedent in this this context.  
      But you look at there are factors you look at whenever you are considering any precedent.  
GRAHAM:  So there's a process in place that the court has followed for a very long time, is that correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is correct, Senator.  
GRAHAM:  Citizens United.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
GRAHAM:  If somebody said Citizens United has been harmful to the country and made a record that the effects of Citizens United has empowered about 20 or 30 people in the country to run all of the elections in some state or locality somewhere past a a ban on soft money and it got to the court, would you at least listen to the argument that Citizens United needs to be revisited?  
KAVANAUGH:  Of course, listen I listen to all arguments. You have an open mind, you get the briefs and arguments and some arguments are better than others. Precedent's critically important, it's a foundation of our system, but you listen to all arguments.  
GRAHAM:  OK. You were where were you on September the 11th, 2001?  
KAVANAUGH:  I was in initially I was in my then office in the EOB, and then after the first as I recall, for the first building was hit, I was in the counsel's Office in the second floor of the West Wing for the next few minutes.  
      Then we were all told to go down to the bottom of the West Wing, and then we were all evacuated and I think I think the thought was Flight 93 might be headed for the White House, it might've been heading here. And Secret Service, we were being hustled out and then then kind of panic, started screaming at us.  
      Sprint run, and we sprinted out. My wife was a few steps ahead of me, she was President Bush's personal aide at the time, and we sprinted out. She was wearing a black and white checked shirt, I remember, and she we sprinted out the front gate kind of into Lafayette Park and no no iPhones or anything like that, Blackberries at that point in time.  
      We didn't have that, and our cellphones didn't work so we were all just kind of out there. I remember somehow ending up seeing on TV down more on Connecticut Avenue, there were TV's out Mayflower Hotel, I remember I was with Sara Taylor who worked at the White House and we watched we were watching as the standing with her when the two when the two buildings when the buildings fell.  
GRAHAM:  So when somebody says post-9/11 that we've been at war and it's called the War on Terrorism, do you generally agree with that concept?  
KAVANAUGH:  I do Senator because Congress passed the Authorization for Use of Military Force, which is still in effect and that was passed of course on September 14th, 2001, three days later.  
GRAHAM:  Let's talk about the law in war. Is there a body of law called the law of armed conflict?  
KAVANAUGH:  There is there is such a body, Senator.  
GRAHAM:  Is there a body of law that's called the basic criminal law?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, Senator.  
GRAHAM:  Are there differences between those two bodies of law?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, Senator.  
GRAHAM:  From an American citizen's point of view, do your constitutional rights follow you? If you're in Paris, does the Fourth Amendment protect you as an American from your own government?  
KAVANAUGH:  From your own government, yes.  
GRAHAM:  OK. So if you're in Afghanistan, do your constitutional rights protect you against your own government?  
KAVANAUGH:  If you're an American if Afghanistan, you have constitutional rights against the U.S. government.  
GRAHAM:  Is there a long-standing  
KAVANAUGH:  That's that's long-settled law.  
GRAHAM:  Isn't there also a long-settled law that it goes back to Eisentrager case, I can't remember the name of it.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, Johnson vs. Eisentrager.  
GRAHAM:  Right that American citizens who collaborate with the enemy have considered enemy combatants?  
KAVANAUGH:  They can be.  
GRAHAM:  Can be.  
KAVANAUGH:  They can be. They're often some they're sometimes criminally prosecuted, sometimes treated in the military sense.  
GRAHAM:  Well let's talk about can be. I think the   
KAVANAUGH:  Under a Supreme Court precedent   
GRAHAM:  Right.  
KAVANAUGH:  Just want to make yeah.  
GRAHAM:  There's a Supreme Court decision that said that American citizens who collaborated with Nazi saboteurs were tried by the military. Is that correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is correct.  
GRAHAM:  I think a couple of them were executed.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yeah.  
GRAHAM:  So if anybody doubts there's a long-standing history in this country that your constitutional rights follow you wherever you go, but you don't have a constitutional right to turn on your own government and collaborate with the enemy of the nation.  
      You'll be treated differently. What's the name of the case, if you can recall, that reaffirmed the concept that you could hold one of our own as an enemy combatant if they were engaged in terrorist activities in Afghanistan? Are you familiar with that case?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yeah, Hamdi.  
GRAHAM:  OK. So the bottom line is on every American citizen, though you have constitutional rights but you do not have a constitutional right to collaborate with the enemy. There's a body of law well developed long before 9/11 that understood the difference between basic criminal law and the law of armed conflict.  
      Do you understand those differences?  
KAVANAUGH:  I do I do understand the there are different bodies of law, of course, Senator.  
GRAHAM:  OK. If you're confirmed, and I believe you will be, what is your hope when all of this is said and done and your time is up, how would you like to be remembered?  
KAVANAUGH:  A good Dad, a good Judge  
FEINSTEIN:  A good husband.  
GRAHAM:  I think he's getting there.  
       
KAVANAUGH:  Good husband.  
       
GRAHAM:  Thanks Dianne, you helped him a lot.  
       
      Going to be better for you tonight.  
       
KAVANAUGH:  Good I owe you I owe you.  
       
      Good son, I'll quickly add.  
       
      A good friend. I think I think about the pillar the pillars of my life are being a Judge of course, being a teacher I've done that and I'm either way this ends up I'm going to continue teaching. Coaching, as I mentioned, is a huge part of my life, try to continue that.  
      Senator Kennedy advised me when we met to make sure you keep coaching, even if you get I'm going to follow that. Volunteering and being a Dad and a son and a husband and being a friend. You know, I talked about my friends yesterday, I didn't really expect I got a little choked up talking about my friends, but   
GRAHAM:  That was well said, you got to tighten it up cause I just ran out of time.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK.  
       
      Thank you, Senator. I can go on, as you know, but I'll stop there.  
GRAHAM:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  We're we're about ready to break for lunch in a vote that we have, and it'll be 30 minutes. But before I do that, I have letters that Senator Feinstein asked me to put into the record from 70 letters from people in opposition to your nomination.  
      And then we also have a a a letters in support of Judge Kavanaugh from hundreds of men and women across the country holding diverse political views. They strongly support his confirmation without objection, and those will also be entered in the record.  
      And then I wanted to explain the exchange that I had with Senator Leahy that just so people don't think that that's something that I did on my own. We had previously sent out a letter, and only Senator Klobuchar up to that point had taken advantage of the letter to be able to ask for documents that were committee confidential so that they could use them at the hearing.   
      And the only thing I've done for Senator Leahy that wasn't already in that letter was to remind people that that we did the same thing for the Gorsuch nomination to the Supreme Court, and it's a policy that Senator Leahy, when he was chairman of the committee, followed. And so the only courtesy was extended to Senator Leahy the fact that he didn't make the request by the timeline that was in the letter, which I think was August 25.  
      We're going to adjourn 30 minutes for a lunch break, and I think that we'll be back here exactly in 30 minutes. If not, Senator or Judge Kavanaugh, we will let your staff know if it's going to be a little later, because you never know what happens in the United States Senate when you have a vote.  
