TILLIS:  The Committee will come to order. Senator Whitehouse.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Welcome back, Judge Kavanaugh. Let me know when you're good.  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm ready. Thank you.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Thank you. Judge Kavanaugh, journalists go to jail to protect sources unless and until the source releases the journalists from their obligation of confidentiality. Will you now release from that obligation any journalists that you spoke with during and about the Starr investigation?  
KAVANAUGH:  You I'm not sure I'm understanding the question.  
WHITEHOUSE:  There were journalists you spoke with during and about the Starr investigation. They're not disclosing what you spoke with them about because you were an undisclosed source. If you say, "don't worry, that's over." Say whatever happened, happened, then they are freed of that obligation and we can find out about what you said to the journalists during and about the Starr investigation. Will you do that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I spoke to reporters at that time at the direction and authorization 
WHITEHOUSE:  I know. That's not that's the basis for my question. If you hadn't done that, I wouldn't be asking this. You don't need to tell me that. The question is will you release those reporters from whatever source confidentiality protection they feel you are owed? It's up to you to do that.  
KAVANAUGH:  I spoke to reporters at the direction and authorization of Judge Starr 
WHITEHOUSE:  You just recited the exact same words that you answered me with beforehand. Will you release them?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's relevant to the answer of the question if I could continue?  
WHITEHOUSE:  What I'd really like to get is an answer to the actual question I asked rather than a disquisition in the general topic area that I asked. This is a very simple thing. You either will or will not.   
      Or if you wish, you're welcome to say, look, I'd like to take that under advisement and I'll get back to you after some reflection and consultation. But our situation right now is that reporter may very well have information about what you told them during the Starr-Clinton investigation that they are unwilling to divulge now because you were a confidential source.  
      Can you release them from that by simply saying here publicly, look, anybody I talk to, say what I said. It's not a problem. I don't need confidentiality any longer.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right. Senator, and if I could just get 30 seconds on this, if that's UK?  
WHITEHOUSE:  Just 30 responsive seconds. I'll offer that. Go for it.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK. I spoke to the reporters at the direction and authorization of Judge Starr, and therefore Judge Starr would be the one who would be part of that process.  
WHITEHOUSE:  No.  
KAVANAUGH:  I was not acting on my own, so 
WHITEHOUSE:  No. No, that is not the way that reporters look at it. They look at it as you were the source. You were the one to whom they owe the obligation of confidentiality. Starr's name has not come up.  
KAVANAUGH:  But I was, in turn, acting as part of that office. And therefore, I guess 
WHITEHOUSE:  But it's yours to divulge.  
KAVANAUGH:  The answer your question is because I can't do that or don't think I should do that as a matter of appropriateness given that I was working for someone else who was running the office. I talked, of course, on the record, publicly 
WHITEHOUSE:  OK, that answers it. You're unwilling to do it. I'll move on. You have said today you've never taken a position on the constitutionality on indicting the president. Let me ask you has there ever been any statutory law on presidential immunity from an indictment or from due process of law?  
KAVANAUGH:  There's been Justice Department law.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Statutory law is the question. Has there ever been a statute that limited the or protected the president against indictment or due process of law?  
KAVANAUGH:  There's been Justice Department law, but now I don't believe there's been statutory law.  
WHITEHOUSE:  The Justice Department is not a law making body, is it?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I think it does. It gives the terms law, encompasses regulations, so yes.  
WHITEHOUSE:  It's directive to the department's own employees, correct? The OLC opinion is what you're talking about.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well that's encompassed, as I think about it, within the concept of law.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Well, if you're going to go to the general concept of law, perhaps, but there is no law-law that Congress has ever passed that protects a president from either indictment or due process of law, correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  Congress has never passed something. The Justice Department has 
WHITEHOUSE:  Has an opinion about it. I understand that.  
KAVANAUGH:  Which is binding on 
WHITEHOUSE:  On the Justice Department. So if as a matter of law a sitting president cannot be indicted, that must be constitutional law since there is no statutory law as a proposition of logic. Is that not correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is not correct as I see it because if the Justice Department has law that binds the Justice Department, that's another source of law as well.  
WHITEHOUSE:  OK. So let's go back to Georgetown Law Journal, 1998, and a conference you attended. And you spoke at it, and the panel that you were on was asked the question, "who on the panel believes as a matter of law that a sitting president cannot be indicted during the term of his office?"  
      That's you and your hand shot up, and I think you've probably seen the film clip of that because it's been posted already. Did you mean as a matter of law, the OLC guidance when you said that?  
KAVANAUGH:  I know that right before the passage you're reading I said there's a lurking constitutional question.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Veto.  
KAVANAUGH:  The fact that I said that suggests that I did not have a position on the constitutional 
WHITEHOUSE:  Although you shot your hand up when you said when the question, as a matter of law, a sitting President cannot be indicted, came up. And it seems to me, there are really only two kinds of law, unless you're really stretching the envelope here.  
      One is laws that Congress passes and the other is laws that are founded in the Constitution. An internal policy directive within the Department of Justice, I think it's a real stretch to call that law.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well I appreciate that, senator, but it has been the longstanding Justice Department position  
WHITEHOUSE:  Policy, yes.  
KAVANAUGH:  and - and right before  
WHITEHOUSE:  And is that what you meant when you put your hand up, do you know?  
KAVANAUGH:  That was 20 years ago, I don't know. But I do know, right before I said that, that I said  
WHITEHOUSE:  Here's why it's important, it's because you've been telling us:  I've never taken a position to say this was a constitutional principle, I've never taken a position on the Constitution on that question, I did not take a position on constitutionality period, I have never taken a position on constitutionality of indictment.   
      Those were all things you've said during the course of this hearing. And it looks to me like that's a bit of a conversion.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right before that though, senator, to be fair to me, I - I did say there's a lurking constitutional question, which implies 
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes, and 
KAVANAUGH:  and I  
WHITEHOUSE:  and then you were asked to answer that question by putting your hand up. And you put your hand up saying, aye.  
KAVANAUGH:  The question 
WHITEHOUSE:  So it seems to me, you answered your question by putting that hand up the way you did.  
KAVANAUGH:  But the question wasn't the Constitution, the question was law. And there was Justice Department position had been  
WHITEHOUSE:  So that's what I'm saying you're saying. Is, you're saying that what you meant was the OLC policy position when you answered a question about law.  
KAVANAUGH:  What I said is I don't know what I was thinking in a panel 20 years ago, but I do know having looked at it that the question was about law, that the Justice Department position has been consistent for 45 years.  
WHITEHOUSE:  As a matter of constitutional law, right? The Justice Department position reflects a view of constitutional law.  
KAVANAUGH:  But it's an interpretation binding on everyone in the Justice Department, as I understand it, and.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Because they're employees of the Department of Justice.  
KAVANAUGH:  That that 
WHITEHOUSE:  In the same way that you can't steal a computer or you can't  
KAVANAUGH:  Right.  
WHITEHOUSE:  you know, bring a pet into your office or whatever other rules there might be.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I I think internal regulations are still still law.  
WHITEHOUSE:  OK, as long as it's your position that that was what you meant by matter of law. I  
KAVANAUGH:  But just to be clear, I said I don't know what I meant 
WHITEHOUSE:  You've you've answered the question.  
KAVANAUGH:  but, when I look at it now, that's what I that's what I think.  
WHITEHOUSE:  So let's go on to recusal. And let me there's a case that's somewhat on point on all of this. It's the Caperton case out of West Virginia. And as you will recall, it was a civil case, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
WHITEHOUSE:  And it came to the Supreme Court because there was an objection that a judge should not sit basically, the nemo iudex problem, should not sit in his own cause, so to speak.   
      And the problem was that the one of the litigants had received three the judge had received $3 million in political support from one of the litigants. Is that the fact pattern correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  I believe that's correct, senator.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes. And the standard that the court came up with was whether that judge had - whether that donor, that party had a significant and disproportionate influence oh, he didn't spell influence right in placing the judge on the case.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  I believe so, that's my memory.  
WHITEHOUSE:  So and the Justice Kennedy 
KAVANAUGH:  The Justice Kennedy opinion  
WHITEHOUSE:  decided that the Constitution requires recusal. If the Constitution requires recusal of a judge who was the beneficiary of a $3 million piece of political support to help him get into office, wasn't it follow perforce that the person who actually appointed the judge would be in a similar or stronger position of significant and disproportionate influence?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the question in the Caperton case, as I understand, was because of the amount of money the financial interest, which is a whole separate branch.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Correct. Which would have a dis significant and disproportionate influence on the judge becoming a judge, right? That's what the connection was. The spending of money by the party helped make the judge the judge.  
      In this case, if a criminal matter involving President Trump came before you, he wouldn't of just spent $3 million to make you judge. He'd of, flat out, made you the judge, 100 percent, finito, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the question of recusal is something that is governed by precedent, governed by rules. One of the underappreciated aspects of recusal is whenever I've had a significant question of recusal as a judge on the D.C. Circuit, I've consulted with colleagues. And so, too, they've consulted with me when they've had their own questions. So, that's part of the process. In other words 
WHITEHOUSE:  Isn't, actually, the 100 percent responsibility for direct appointment more significant in terms of influence than, simply, making a big political contribution to a judge? That's like 
KAVANAUGH:  Well, just 
WHITEHOUSE:  One hundred percent responsibility, appointed, period, done.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, just on the - I don't mean to quibble, but on the premise of your question, the - the Senate, obviously, as it's a shared responsibility. The president and the Senate participate in the Supreme Court confirmation process - appointment process.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Well, you were very clear yesterday in our discussion that it was the President of the United States who appointed you, and this is about that. This is about how you get to the seat, and you got appointed by President.   
      Would that not pertain, as a significant influence - I mean, what possible greater influence could there be on who is in the seat that you're nominated to than the nomination of the president to that seat?  
KAVANAUGH:  So, two points if I could, Senator? First, I've said already, I don't believe it appropriate, in this context, to make decisions, and recusal is a decision on a case. And so, I don't think it's appropriate.  
WHITEHOUSE:  OK. Well, if it's not appropriate then let me move on with something else because - let me ask you about the question of presidential, should we say, conflicts with prosecutors.  
      When you were in the Starr prosecution effort you were exposed to this contest with the Clinton White House and you described the Clinton White House as running a - and I'm quoting you here, "presidentially approved smear campaign." That was one phrase you used, "A disgraceful effort to undermine the rule of law," was another phrase you used, "An episode that will, forever, stand as a dark chapter in American presidential history."  
KAVANAUGH:  That was about something different, but 
WHITEHOUSE:  And you - a presidentially approved smear campaign against Starr was what the topic was. You, then, said in a later memo that "The president has tried to disgrace Starr and his office with a sustained propaganda campaign that would make Nixon blush, and he should be forced to account for that." Have your views of presidential interference or smearing of an Independent or a Special Counsel changed since you made those statements?  
KAVANAUGH:  Those comments were in a memo written, as I recall  
       
WHITEHOUSE:  Two, actually. Two memos, but close enough. Yeah.   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes. Well the one that I'm remembering, written late at night after an emotional meeting in the office, dashed off and some of the language in that, as I think I told you or told some of the senators in individual meetings was was heated, and I understand that, but that that's that was my memo at the time. And I don't I don't think I think I've been clear I don't want to talk about current events because I don't think sitting judge I'm a sitting judge as well as a nominee I don't think I should talk about current events in  
WHITEHOUSE:  So, the how about the just the guy? The guy who was outraged at being the on the receiving end of a smear campaign. Does that guy still exist or is he long gone?   
KAVANAUGH:  Well, that's that's what I wrote at the time, how I felt one night after a meeting we had had in August of 1998, I believe, is at least the memo I'm remembering.   
WHITEHOUSE:  OK, last topic, because my time's getting short here. The hypothetical problem that I have has to do with an appellate court which makes a finding of fact, asserts a proposition of fact to be true, and upon that proposition hangs the decision that it reaches. And the question is what happens when that proposition of fact actually, in reality you've referenced the real world so often actually in reality turns out not to be true?  
      What is the obligation of an appellate court if it has hung a decision on a proposition of fact and then the proposition of fact turns out not to be true? Does it have any obligation to go back and try to clean up that discrepancy to clean up that mess?   
KAVANAUGH:  I think, Senator, it's probably hard to answer that question in the abstract, because  
WHITEHOUSE:  But if I give you specifics then you'll say you can't answer that because that would be talking about a case. So I'm kind of in a quandary here with you.   
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I was going to give you a couple thoughts, which are the I think that would be wrapped up in the question of of precedent and stare decisis. And one of things you could look at one of the factors you could look at, how wrong was the decision and if it's based on a erroneous factual premise, that is clearly one of the factors you would you would  
WHITEHOUSE:  You would look at and whether it could be  
       
KAVANAUGH:  mistake of history.   
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes.   
KAVANAUGH:  Sometimes there have been cases were there were mistakes of history in decisions, mistakes of fact, mistakes of 
       
WHITEHOUSE:  So just quickly, we'll let's the two examples that come readily to mind one is Shelby County, in which the court said in looking at whether there was still any kind of institutional racism in the preclearance states that they needed to worry about. Nope. The, quote, "country has changed and current conditions", to use their phrase, "are different."   
      First, where do you suppose the five justices who made that decision got expertise in vestigial state racism to make that determination at all?   
KAVANAUGH:  So, I I can't comment on the decision other than to say it's a precedent. I understand the point you're making about  
       
WHITEHOUSE:  Because you do know that since then, both North Carolina was found to have targeted minority votes with, quote, "surgical precision", which is a pretty rough phrase. And Texas got after it so frequently that a federal court finally said, look, we think there is a penchant for discrimination here.   
      So if you if you've got the five judges saying that it's over in these states and then it turns out it really isn't over that there's actually still surgical precision targeting of minority voters and that there is a penchant for discrimination in the Texas state government that ought to be something that might cause some reconsideration of the Shelby holding, oughtn't it?   
KAVANAUGH:  So three things on that, I think, Senator. One, I think the case didn't did not strike down preclearance as opposed to saying the formula needed to be 
       
WHITEHOUSE:  De facto it did. Preclearance ended in all those states with that decision, correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  I yes, I agree I understand that.   
WHITEHOUSE:  OK.   
KAVANAUGH:  But the  
WHITEHOUSE:  So I've got one minute left, let me jump to the other example, because I think it's an important one and I've got my time is running out. And that is Citizens United. Citizens United took on the proposition that the unlimited spending that it authorized by people capable of unlimited spending would be both transparent and independent, correct?   
KAVANAUGH:  Well, the court upheld the disclosure requirements in that case as it if that's the question. I'm not sure  
WHITEHOUSE:  It actually said more than that; it said that it's the transparency and the independence of the spending that it authorized  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.   
WHITEHOUSE:  that were the guardians against corruption.   
KAVANAUGH:  Right. So it wasn't contributions to parties or candidates, correct.   
WHITEHOUSE:  So the the First Amendment ends where efforts to corrupt begin, correct? You don't have a First Amendment right to corrupt your government.   
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court has relied on corruption and the appearance of corruption as part of the test and it's drawnyou know  
WHITEHOUSE:  Correct.   
KAVANAUGH:  you know this very well.   
WHITEHOUSE:  And in order to fend off the argument that big money corrupts and absolute money corrupts absolutely, they said no, because there's going to be independence and transparency. In fact, if I remember correctly, they said I don't have it in front of me and I'm out of oh, here we go.   
      The separation between candidates and independent expenditures negates the possibility of corruption. So if they're wrong, factually, about the spending being transparent and we know that they are from what we've seen since then and if they're wrong factually about the independence of the spending and we know that they are from actual events that have happened since then then that strikes a pretty hard blow against the logic of Citizens United, does it not?   
KAVANAUGH:  So Citizens United, as you know, is a precedent of the Supreme Court, so entitled to respect as a matter of stare decisis. But as you as you know and I would just reiterate, if someone wants to challenge that decision, they one of the things that anyone could raise about any case is that it's based on a mistake in premise or a mistake in factual premises and that's always the kind of thing that courts are open to hearing.   
WHITEHOUSE:  My time is expired. I thank the Chairman for the indulgence of the extra minute.   
TILLIS:  A a couple of things. First, I would just note that I believe Justices Breyer and Ginsburg sat on the Supreme Court during Clinton v. Jones, and three out of four of President Nixon's appointees, who are were on the Supreme Court that heard U.S. v. Nixon.   
      And, Judge Kavanaugh, I have a my colleague and friend, Senator Whitehouse, attempted to imply you'd resolve the constitutional question of whether a sitting president can be indicted. Isn't it true that in a contemporaneous law review article you authored you explicitly stated this is your these are your words whether the Constitution allows indictment of the sitting of a sitting president is debatable?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is what I said in the contemporaneous Georgetown Law Journal article; I've said that subsequently as well.   
TILLIS:  And without objection, I'd like to have that article submitted for the record.   
      And before I transition, if Senator Cruz will indulge me, I I reserved 13 minutes of my time last night and I was wondering you you you were the two instances where you weren't answer the question I didn't know if you wanted to make any clarifying comments on disclosing sources relative to the discussion around Judge Starr. And at one point you were saying that Senator Whitehouse said something that you said, that's about something different. I don't know if you remember what that was, but if you want to clarify it before we transition to Senator Cruz, I'll give you a minute to do so.   
KAVANAUGH:  I think I'll just leave the record as it stands on that 
       
TILLIS:  All right.  
KAVANAUGH:  That third comment that he referenced was about something a different aspect of that investigation.   
TILLIS:  OK.  
      Senator Cruz?  
CRUZ:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to note at the outset that the senator from Rhode Island took his questioning as an opportunity to impugn the residents of North Carolina and the residents of Texas as having a penchant for bigotry.   
      And and I appreciate the compassion from the senator from Rhode Island. I will point out I'll let you rise to the defense of your own state. But I will point out that in the state of Texas, that we had, just a few years back, three statewide elected African-American officials all Republican, I might note which I believe at the time was the most of any state in the union. And I think it's the case that Rhode Island has none.   

WHITEHOUSE:  Well 
CRUZ:  And I would note as well 
WHITEHOUSE:  For the record, I apologize to my colleague if he takes any umbrage about my reference to the general residents of Texas. This was a specific quote from a federal court decision in Texas, referring to the decision-makers in that case. So 
       
TILLIS:  Senator Cruz, you have 30 additional seconds.   
CRUZ:  Judge Kavanaugh, yesterday you had some discussion with Senator Leahy about what it means to be a textualist. And I want to go back and revisit that conversation, and ask, for someone at home who's watching this, why should it matter to them if a judge is a textualist? What what difference does that make to somebody not involved with the Supreme Court?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, it goes to the foundation of the Constitution and the system that the framers designed. With a legislative branch, an executive branch and a judicial branch that were all separate.  
      As was said in Federalist 78, the judiciary does not exercise will but it exercise exercises judgment. The policy decisions are made by the legislative branch with the president, of course, in terms of signing legislation. So the House, the Senate and the president. The president enforces federal law, comes to the judiciary.   
      When we interpret a statute, if we, as judges, must adhere to the text of the statute. Why is that? Two reasons, I think, are paramount.   
      The first is the statute as written is what was passed as a formal matter by the Congress, by the both houses of the Congress, signed by the president into law. So as a formal matter, that is the law.   
      So if we are going to exercise judgment, not will, we need to adhere to the law as passed. And the law as passed is reflected in the written words that were went through both houses and signed by the president.   
      Secondly, in supporting that, as a practical matter, legislation is a compromise. And within the Senate, within the House, with the president as well, lots of compromises are inherent in any legislative product. And that's what my experience shows, that's what I know your experience shows as well, Senator.   
      So when a case comes to court, a statute comes to court, we upset the compromise that you so carefully reached and where people might have given up this for that in terms of the legislative final language.  
      And we then insert ourselves after the fact into the process, and upset the compromise if we don't stick to the actual words of the text of the statute as passed by Congress.   
      So as both a formal matter of what the law is and as a practical matter of not inserting ourselves into the legislative process and upsetting the legislative process, it is critical that judges stick to the law as written, the text of the statute as passed by Congress and signed by the president.   
CRUZ:  What, in your view, is is the proper role, if any, for legislative history in the statutory adjudication? As you know, different justices have had different views on this.   
KAVANAUGH:  Well I think all judges are much more skeptical of legislative history than they once were. That's the influence, as you know, Senator, largely of Justice Scalia, but really very mainstream now, to be very skeptical of legislative history.   
      And, again, two reasons support that skepticism, if not outright refusal to use it. The first is that the legislative history and by that, I mean the committee reports or the floor statements made by individual members on the floor of the House or Senate are not part of the law as passed.   
      And that's important because it would be very easy and I've said this in my articles for Congress if there are a paragraph or a page or more in the legislative history.  
      And a committee report that was really important, we'll put it into the law. Put it into the introduction to the law, have it be part of the law that's passed. When it's a committee report, it might have just been been seen by one committee in one house. It might not have even been seen by the other house. The president of course, who's part of the process, might never have seen it.  
      So to rely on that is to upset the formal process by which law is enacted in the United States. So to, again, the legislative history, the committee report is not part of the compromise that's reached between the House and the Senate and the president, at least not ordinarily.   
      And so you're allowing one committee, for example, or one member to go down to the floor of the House or Senate and to say something that will shape subsequent judicial interpretation and upset the careful compromise that's reflected in the text that's passed by the Senate, passed by the House and signed by the president.   
      So, again, both formal and practical reasons why skepticism of legislative history is warranted, and why Justice Scalia, I think, was able to persuade justices across the spectrum, judges across the spectrum, that legislative history is useful for understanding why something came to be, but not as a tool for upsetting or or changing your interpretation of the words of the statute.  
CRUZ:  Also yesterday, when you were talking with Senator Leahy, I I believe you described yourself as as an originalist.   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.   
CRUZ:  Can you explain what that means to you? What you mean by that, and and why, again, people at home should care. Why why that should matter if a judge or justice is an originalist.   
KAVANAUGH:  So by "originalist," it's important to be clear because there're different things people hear when they hear the term "originalist."  
      There was an old school of original intent, the subjective intentions of the drafters or ratifiers. And that's not really the proper approach in my view, for similar reasons to the discussion of legislative history of the statutes.   
      By "originalist," what I've means is original public meaning or the "constitutional textualism" is a term I've used that refers to the same concept, which is "pay attention to the words of the Constitution.  
      The the Constitution, as Article Six of the Constitution makes clear, is law. It is not aspirational principles. It is law. It's the supreme law of the land. And in that sense, it's superior to statutes but it is law, like just like statutes are superior law.   
      The Constitution itself including the amendments but the original Constitution was itself a compromise. So it's law and it's a compromise reached at Philadelphia in the summer of 1787. And of course, Madison's notes and the history of that shows all the compromises that were reached; probably the most compromise is the compromise that allows for representation according to population in the House, representation according to state in the Senate, the Connecticut Compromise, as it's often referred to.   
      It important for judges, again, not to upset the formal law that's written in the Constitution or to upset the compromises reached either in the original Constitution or in the Amendments. Now, one one key thing to add to that is precedent is part of the constitutional interpretation as well, as Federalist 78 makes clear and the Judicial Power Clause of Article III also makes clear.   
      So a system of precedent is built into how judges interpret the Constitution in constitutional cases on an ongoing basis. So that's part of the proper mode of constitutional interpretation and an important system of precedent.   
CRUZ:  OK, thank you. Let's shift back to the topic you and I discussed yesterday, which is religious liberty, which is a topic of considerable interest and importance to a great many Americans.   
      In private practice, you you wrote an amicus brief in the Santa Fe case for Congressman Steve Largent and J.C. Watts. Could you describe to this committee what that case was about and and and your representation there?   
KAVANAUGH:  I will. Of course, Senator Cornyn argued the case as Attorney General for the State of Texas, and did an outstanding job. I remember participating in the moot court as the senator recalled.   
CORNYN:  It didn't turn out too well, Judge.   
        
KAVANAUGH:  You did a you did an excellent job, Senator, as I remember being there.   
      So the case involves a prayer before a football game, and the Supreme Court of course has had a number of cases on religious expression in schools, and these are always challenging cases and very fact-specific. But there are two principles that the precedents have set forth. One is that school-sponsored prayer at school events is often impermissible, either at the school day, Engel v. Vitale, at graduations, Lee v. Weisman.   
      At the same time, when students want to express themselves in some way, T-shit, clothing, or saying their own prayers, say, before a football game or other event, the students want to say a prayer for themselves or there's an open forum where students are allowed to say whatever they want and one student chooses to talk about religion or say a prayer, that's on the generally on the free speech side of the house, freedom of religion side of the house of the Supreme Court precedent, which would protect the religious liberty of the individual in that circumstance.   
      The Santa Fe case came I think Senator Cornyn would say well, Senator Cornyn would say it came on the free speech, freedom of religion side of the house. The Supreme Court thought that the school was too involved, I would say, in the prayer opportunity in that case, and thus attributed the prayer in that case to the school, and the Supreme Court therefore said that this the prayer in that case was impermissible.   
      It was a very fact-specific decision I think based on how some of the actual prayers had gone down in the in the school district there. And so it was really in the grey area on the facts between these two principles, freedom of freedom of speech and freedom of religion for individuals on the one hand, no school-sponsored prayer on the other, and those two principles are part of the Supreme Court precedent that I think the courts have applied for a long time now.   
CRUZ:  So so what led you to want to take on that representation in the amicus brief?   
KAVANAUGH:  I think at that time I worked on several was asked to work on several cases involving religious liberty and religious speech. I also did a case in the good amicus brief in the Good News Club case, and that was a case where a school district allowed use of a the gymnasium auditorium area after school for whatever group from the community wanted to use the the facility, and they would allow everyone to come in, you know, Boy Scouts, the the community, any community group to come in, but they didn't allow religious groups to come in.   
      And that seemed to be discrimination against religion, discrimination against religious people, religious speech. And I was asked to do an amicus brief which made the point I wrote that made the point that religious people, religious speakers, religious speech is entitled to its place on an equal basis in the public square, including in this case in the school auditorium or gymnasium.   
      The Supreme Court agreed with that principle in that case, stating that discrimination against religion in public facilities and in in the nature of what was going on in that case was impermissible and a violation of freedom of speech, freedom of religion, and therefore unconstitutional.   
      Those cases are important, I think, because it's important that the to recognize that the Constitution, the First Amendment of the Constitution as well as many statutes of course protect religious liberty in the United States, religious freedom in the United States, and as I've said in some of my opinions, we are we're all equally American no matter what religion we are or no religion at all, and that means religious speakers and religious people have a right to their place in the public square.   
CRUZ:  Another case you you were involved in as a judge is is you wrote a dissent from denial of rehearing en banc in in the Priests for Life case. Can can you tell this committee about about that case and and you opinion there?   
KAVANAUGH:  That was a group that was being forced to provide a certain kind of health coverage over their religious objection to their employees, and under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, the question was first, was this a substantial burden on the religious exercise? And it seemed to me quite clearly it was. It was a technical matter of filling out a form, in that case with that they said filling out the form would make them complicit in the provision of the abortion-inducing drugs that they were as a religious matter, objected to.   
      The second question was did the government have a compelling interest nonetheless in providing the coverage to the employees and applying the governing Supreme Court precedent from Hobby Lobby I said that the answer to that was yes, the government did have a compelling interest, following Justice Kennedy's opinion in Hobby Lobby. He said the government did have a compelling interest in ensuring access.   
      And then it came down to the least restrictive means prong of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, and that prong of the act, to my mind, is an opportunity to see is there is there a win-win in some respects? In other words, the government interest in ensuring healthcare coverage, can that be provided without doing it on the backs of the religious objector? So that's what the court's looking for.   
      In that case, Professor Volokh's written about that. And in that case, it seemed to me that the government had avenues to ensure that the coverage was provided without doing so on the backs of the religious objectors, and I so ruled following the Supreme Court precedent in Hobby Lobby and in the subsequent case Wheaton College where they had an order that I followed and seemed to me to dictate the result that I identified in the Priests for Live dissent.   
      In another case, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act just to reiterate, was overwhelmingly passed by Congress in the early 1990s and signed by President Clinton and was an important addition to the protection of religious freedom in the United States to supplement the constitutional protection that exists in the free exercise clause.   
CRUZ:  Well, and I would note, much like yesterday when we discussed your pro bono representation of the synagogue, that Priests for Life using the paradigm that some of the Democratic isle have suggested of little guy versus big guy. By any measure the Priests for Life for the little guy against the almost all-powerful federal government, and in that opinion, presumably because you felt the law dictated it, you sided with the Priests for Life in that in that decision.  
KAVANAUGH:  That's that's correct Senator and I think a lot of the religious freedom cases the Supreme Court has had that has been the case. There was a prisoner, in an opinion written by Justice Alito I believe unanimous opinion, where the prisoners being for a Muslim prisoner was being forced to shave his beard in violation of his religious beliefs.  
      Justice Alito as I recall, wrote the opinion for the Supreme Court saying that was a substantial burden on his religion was not necessary and and that is just another example of how religious liberty protects all of us no matter what our religious beliefs are and that is important principle foundational principle both of the Constitution of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.  
CRUZ:  Another case that you were involved in, in your career, that stood out to me personally, just being Cuban-American is that as I understand it, in November 1999 when Elian Gonzales came to this country as a young child and sadly, the federal government ended up coming into the home he was staying with machine guns, take him into custody and removing him to Cuba, that that you represent you worked on Elian Gonzales case pro bono against the INS returning him to Cuba. If you could talk a little bit about that case a little bit to the committee.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, thank you Senator. I was asked by another person in my firm who had gotten a call from someone in Florida whether we could, on an emergency basis, do, as I recall, a rehearing and bank petition in the 11th Circuit and then a cert petition in the Supreme Court on a really very short notice because he was going to be returned.  
      The question was really due process. What kind of hearing needed to be held before the INS returned him to Cuba. It was a question under the Refugee Act as what that required and also a question under the Due Process Clause. And interestingly, it seemed that the INS had not was interpreting the Refugee Act in a way that seemed a stretch of the statutory language and was not in some kind of formal regulations so the question of Chevron deference to an informal agency position was a question in the case.   
      And I wrote the cert petition and the en banc petition before that saying that the agency was stretching the language of the statute beyond recognition and was doing so in a way that was entitled to no deference because it was not in any kind of formal regulation which, years later, turns out to be a position the Supreme Court has agreed with in terms of administrative law but in that case, I got involved because I was asked to get involved on a moment's notice in a case of importance for people who needed help. And 
CRUZ:  Let me ask one final question. You've been nominated to the highest court in the land. As you know, there's another court in the land, that is the basketball court atop the U.S. Supreme Court courtroom and I believe that no sitting justice has played regularly there since Justice Thomas many years ago when he was a much younger justice.   
      If you are confirmed do you intend to break that tradition and return to having a justice play on the highest court in the land?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well I do if fortunate enough to be confirmed, I will as Justice Thomas did at some point get injured so I hope that precedent is not one that I that I would follow. But if I'm fortunate enough to be confirmed, yes indeed Senator, thank you.  
CRUZ:  Excellent. I'm very glad to hear it.  
GRASSLEY:  Before I call on Senator Klobuchar, there's a couple of things. One, I became aware of the fact that a lot of the committee confidential material that's been requested, some of the requests that we got were already public so somebody's not doing very good homework if they're asking us for committee confidential stuff to be disclosed that's that's already available to the public.  
      Then I want to ask you Judge Kavanaugh, you testified in 2004 that you were not involved in handling Judge Pryor's nomination while you were in the White House Counsel's office. Is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  I believe that's 
GRASSLEY:  I'm talking about the handling of it.   
KAVANAUGH:  The handling we had one person who would be assigned to each judge. I was not as I recall at least I was not the primary person on that.  
GRASSLEY:  So isn't the case that somebody else handled the nomination and if you know who that is, I'd like to give you the chance to say so and if you don't I want to suggest a name.  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't remember who it was.  
GRASSLEY:  Could it have been Ben Powell?  
KAVANAUGH:  It sure could have been, yes. He was another associate counsel.   
GRASSLEY:  What if any involvement did you have?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't recall specifics. We would have met at meetings. I could have attended a moot court where we did a mock hearing. I don't remember specifics but that sounds right to me that Ben would have been the person primarily in charge of that handling it.  
GRASSLEY:  Well I had colleagues attempting to insinuate that you were interviewed that you interviewed Judge Pryor. The documents that we have that he was referring is one of your colleagues asking how the Pryor interview went. It certainly seems to me that this email is more likely indicate that you know the people who interviewed Judge Pryor but may have even been kept in the loop because it was something that you were interested in.  
KAVANAUGH:  That sounds correct. I knew him and therefore was interested in his process.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Klobuchar.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. I'm going to do some follow-ups from our discussions yesterday, Judge. I thought I'd start with campaign finance.   
      In the document that the Chairman has pointed out several time was originally designated committee confidential that I put the request in and got made public.   
      And on that document you said that contributions to limits on contributions to candidates have some constitutional problems and I would ask you about Buckley v. Valeo, which is notable because it did not apply strict scrutiny to campaign finance laws. You really didn't answer yesterday about whether you would follow that precedent of Buckley and so I want to be more specific. Do you think that strict scrutiny is the right standard to apply to all campaign finance laws?  
       
KAVANAUGH:  Well the Supreme Court as you say, Senator, has since 1976 in the landmark Buckley case, applied a different level of scrutiny is one way to put it to expenditures, on the one hand, and contributions on the other. And that divide has persisted since then to the current day so that now contributions to parties as well as candidates are on the one side of the line and independent expenditures or expenditures and donations to outside groups are on the other side of the line. So that law is precedent of the Supreme Court that's been around for a long time and has set the basics for the campaign-finance framework that we're all familiar with.  
KLOBUCHAR:  But will you say it's settled law or precedent?  
KAVANAUGH:  It is precedent of the Supreme Court that's been applied since 1976 and therefore entitled the respect under principles of stare decisis and anyone seeking to upset that.   
      There are people who don't like the expenditure the freedom to the court's blessing of freedom to make unlimited expenditures of course. There are people from the other direction that don't like some of the contribution limits-who don't like Buckley versus Vallejo from that side either. So there are people who kind of hit it from both sides.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Understand.  
KAVANAUGH:  But it is a precedent that's been applied repeatedly. And 
KLOBUCHAR:  So do you think Brown v. Board of Education is settled law?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think Brown versus Board of Education as I've said many times before, is the single greatest moment in Supreme Court history.  
KLOBUCHAR:  I know. I know. I know. You said it and I appreciate that.  
KAVANAUGH:  And it's correct. That's correct.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Okay.  
KAVANAUGH:  It's correct because it corrected a historic mistake in Plessy versus Ferguson.  
KLOBUCHAR:  I understand, but is it settled law? I'm trying to get at this difference between-when you say some things are precedent which is-we had an issue here because the last hearing we had justice courses said a bunch of things were precedent and now he's on the court and he's already dissented actually from Justice Roberts and didn't even want to uphold the reasonable expectation of privacy.   
      So I'm trying to get at the difference between when people that come before us say it's precedent versus settled law. Do you think there's a difference in those two words?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, here's what I know, Senator, which is, for cases or issues that might come back before the court it's important as a matter of independence as reflected in the nominee precedent not to give a forecast or hint about that and part of that is giving a thumbs up or thumbs down on those precedents that could be involved in that.  
KLOBUCHAR:  I get it. But so if Brown v. Board of Education is settled law and say like Roe v. Wade you just say it's precedent precedent on precedent with Casey. Is that a difference? Because Brown v. Board of Education-I just think how many years ago. So that was 64 years ago but Roe v. Wade was 45 years ago and I'm trying to figure out our using these words in different ways-when something is precedent, and something is settled law.  
KAVANAUGH:  So what I'm trying to do is adhere to the line that's been drawn by the eight justices currently sitting on the Supreme Court. And the line they've drawn is for the vast body of Supreme Court precedent they've refused, in Justice Kagan's words, to give a thumbs-up or thumbs down on that precedent. There are some historical cases where there's no prospect of that case coming back where they felt free to indicate their agreement with them.  
KLOBUCHAR:  And so that's Brown v. Board of Education.  
KAVANAUGH:  Correct. And Brown v. Board of Education I said the single greatest moment in Supreme Court history.  
KLOBUCHAR:  I know. But it's just that Roe is now 45 years old. I mean, that's the issue. Why isn't that a thumbs-up settled law?  
KAVANAUGH:  None of the currently sitting justices of the Supreme Court have opined on that.  
KLOBUCHAR:  OK. I want to go back to presidential power-and this isn't a hypothetical. I'm just going back to 2009 which isn't that long ago in the University of Minnesota Law Review. And that's where you said we should not burden a sitting president with civil suits, criminal investigations, or criminal prosecutions. And when you and I talked about this yesterday you said that Congress could still pursue an impeachment proceeding, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes. The impeachment mechanism 
KLOBUCHAR:  Your view back then because you wouldn't comment on it. But your view when you wrote this was that well, your view now is that Congress should still be able to pursue an impeachment.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, the Constitution specifies impeachment always as a tool in the Constitution itself.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Okay. So when we go back to when you wrote this it's not a hypothetical but when you wrote this in 2009 and you were thinking about it did you think then-and this is what you meant-that a president shouldn't have to be investigated? You said it, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  The context there I believe, Senator, was talking about civil suits or criminal investigations or criminal lawsuits and it was not my position on the constitutionality. It was something for Congress to consider and the idea was reflecting on my experience after September 11 and what we can do to make the presidency the most effective for the American people.  
KLOBUCHAR:  I'm trying to understand in practicality when you look at the last impeachment proceedings how you would in effect do this if you didn't have an investigation because these other ones have used independent counsels, they've used special counsel and if you don't have that don't you effectively eviscerate the impeachment part of the Constitution?  
KAVANAUGH:  Not at all Senator. Historically Congress has often had investigative bodies that have done the work.  
KLOBUCHAR:  But why would we want to foreclose our ability to use a special counsel or an independent counsel?  
KAVANAUGH:  So, that's your decision, ultimately, in Congress to decide. That's one of you that you just articulated and of course Congress has not enacted any special deferral for civil suits, so Congress is stuck with the Jones v. Clinton result from that case and is stuck with of course the existing system of special counsels.  
KLOBUCHAR:  When you to get back into where you were in 2009 when you wrote this as opposed to just using a hypothetical. So we've said several times here no one is above the law and I said that in my opening statement but when you said this then you mean no one is temporarily above the law. So if a sitting president, if she was in office and there was some crime committed murder, white-collar crime, everything then you're saying in this article at the time that she shouldn't be subject to a criminal prosecution?  
KAVANAUGH:  That would be an issue for Congress to consider if it wanted to pursue providing a temporary deferral. There is there are statutes that do that for members of the military; some servicemembers serving overseas. In fact I think President Clinton's brief in the Clinton versus Jones case cited that example as something where there are statutory-deferral, not immunity. It's important to distinguish immunity from deferral. And not above the law but the timing of when a particular litigation will occur, so I wouldn't call that above the law, I'd call that a timing question.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Okay. But it would be a long time. If a president was serving for four years or eight years given-and again, I'm reading the words-we should not burden a sitting president with civil suits, criminal investigations, or criminal prosecution. So it feels to me that was your view when you wrote that.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, it was an idea for Congress to consider along with many other ideas I had in there about judicial confirmations and more powers, and it was all reflecting again, that one was reflecting on an idea Congress could consider.  
      The whole point was to make the, you know, help help the country do better based on my observations from three five and a half years working in a White House where during war during wartime.  
KLOBUCHAR:  I want to turn to another topic, those follow-ups from Senator Harris' questions from last night. She asked you questions about voting rights. I'm the Ranking Member of the Rules Committee and she noted many states have restricted access to voting since the Supreme Court's decision in Shelby County, which struck down a key provision of the Voting Rights Act.  
      And according to the Brennan Center, 23 states now have more restrictive voting laws than they did in 2010. Many of these laws have been challenged in court, some have been overturned, so here's one more question on this.  
      Should courts consider these widespread efforts to restrict voting what's been going on since 2010, when ruling on statutes that affect the right to vote?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well I think in any particular case, Senator, you'd want to see what the record established and the case was, and the record could include what's going on in that particular state. And I could imagine a factual record were where that would include also potentially what's going on in other states, as well, so I   
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you, that's thanks. Studies by the Brennan Center and other nonpartisan organizations have found no evidence of widespread voter fraud, and a study by the Washington Post found only 31 credible instances of fraud from 2000 to 2014 out of more than one billion ballots cast.  
      Do you believe there's evidence of voter fraud? Do you believe I know you told Senator Harris that you watch read some election law blogs as I was sitting here last night. And so have you read one of these articles on widespread voter fraud on one of these blogs you mentioned?  
      I'm just concerned because it's out there and I would think that would be something that could be looked at.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well I   
KLOBUCHAR:  If you have any views on it.  
KAVANAUGH:  Certainly look look at Professor Hasen's election law blog, and that that that's one of the ones that I've looked at, I've looked at other blogs as well and there is discussion of this issue and I would want as a sitting Judge, I would want to see a record before me of what's going on in a particular case.  
      I hesitate to opine on something based on something I've read in a law review article or a blog. I think you have a better sense of what's going on there, but I would want a record in a particular case to determine what what the evidence in a particular case was.  
KLOBUCHAR:  OK. And I want to turn now to affirmative action, and Senator Booker raised these questions as well late last night. And in a 2017 speech at Notre Dame, you discussed how affirmative action represents a quote "long-standing exception" end quote to the quote "basic equal protection right not to be treated differently by the government on account of your race."  
      And you summarized the court's debates on this issue and remarked, "On what basis is the court making those decisions? Is there something in the text of the Constitution that tells us one is good enough and the other is not good enough? Not really."  
      Again, this is common law judging to define the contours of the exception to the constitutional right. So what did you mean by that statement?"  
KAVANAUGH:  Well I I what I meant by that is we, in many areas of constitutional law, have say free speech rights, but we have exceptions analyzed usually we were just talking about under strict scrutiny and we've talked a lot about the Second Amendment, how the regulations that co-exist with the individual Second Amendment right.  
      And so too in the Fourteenth Amendment context, the equal protection context, what kinds of programs are permissible, consistent with the equal protection right. And there are the precedent is critical on this.   
      The precedent is built up things over time the Bakke case, of course, the most prominent in the higher education context, where the court rejected remedying past societal discrimination as a basis for an affirmative action program.  
      But the court accepted diversity as a compelling interest for an affirmative action program, and that rationale has remained as part of the Supreme Court's precedent in a higher education context. So the court applies these principles, they build up case law over time and that's part of the system of precedent that develops and that's what I was referring to there, I believe.  
KLOBUCHAR:  OK. While at the White House you suggested that a federal program meant to encourage the participation of minority and women-owned businesses and transportation contracting was unconstitutional, this was a document that was just made public by the Chair today.  
      Although you say that you're was your personal opinion in the document, you told Senator Booker that this was just your view as a lawyer for a client, the client was the president at the time. The program remains in place today and it's intended to level the playing field and increase the participation of minority and women-owned businesses and local and state transportation projects.  
      So I'm just trying to understand your views here. Do you believe that the use of race as a factor in federal contracting programs violates the Fourteenth Amendment?  
KAVANAUGH:  So my note in that case, as I understand it and have seen it briefly, was rooted in Supreme Court precedent, the Croson case and I think it even says see Croson in the e-mail, and Croson is the Supreme Court precedent where the court had invalidated a Richmond contracting program, as I recall.  
      And so that precedent made clear what conditions need to be satisfied before a racial a contracting program of that kind could be sustained consistent with the Constitution. And the analysis that we went through set suggested that, at least as it was being applied as I recall, the federal program ran afoul of the Supreme Court precedent specified in the Croson case.  
      So in that sense, I was providing advice about how the program would fit within the Supreme Court's existing precedent in the Croson case. So at least that's my best understanding, I I haven't gone back to restudy it, but that's my best understanding, was that it was rooted in the precedent of the Supreme Court.  
KLOBUCHAR:  OK. Well I'll well I'll maybe we can get that in writing at some point if you want to look back at it. We've witnessed unprecedented attacks on journalists and journalism over the past several months.  
      This should be concerning to everyone, because the role of journalists is critical to our democracy. This is personal for me, my Dad was a journalist his entire life and he even wrote a blog. He's now 90 for a while you probably didn't read that one though.  
       
      In New York Times v. Sullivan, the court issued a landmark ruling in support of First Amendment protections for the press by affirming that when newspapers report on public officials, they can say what they want unless they say something untrue with quote "actual malice," end quote.  
      Under New York Times v. Sullivan, do you believe the First Amendment would permit public officials to sue the media under any standard less demanding than actual malice, and can you explain what that standard means to you?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well the Supreme Court has elaborated on and applied that standard repeatedly over time. I have too as a lower court judge, and that so that precedent is now been applied over and over and over again.  
      I'm not aware of much effort to deviate from that standard.   
      Interestingly, in New York Times versus Sullivan, the court in the course of that opinion said that the Sedition Act of 1798 had been overturned in the court of history, which I thought was an interesting turn of phrase. In the New York Times versus Sullivan, of course, the Sedition Act was the act that said criticism of public officials was illegal in the United States in in 1798.   
      Never actually struck down by a court but New York Times versus Sullivan made clear that that act had been overturned in the court of history.  
KLOBUCHAR:  OK. I also want to talk about First Amendment protections for journalists and how journalists have been deterred from doing their jobs at times under threat of jail time. And I've raised this issue in the hearings for many of the justice nominees - Justice Department nominees, this Congress, but it's also critical for the court.  
      In Branzburg v. Hayes, a five-four court didn't recognize a reporter's privilege, at least in the context of a criminal grand jury testimony. Since then, various circuit courts have debated the contours of the decision with most courts 

KLOBUCHAR:  With most courts now recognizing some type of privilege, particularly in civil cases. Can you talk about the scope of that decision and whether there are instances where the court should recognize a reporter's privilege?  
KAVANAUGH:  In civil cases. So I did sit on a case once where we had exactly that question presented 
KLOBUCHAR:  I knew that and 
KAVANAUGH:  and we had a great oral argument and it was fascinating, and I put a lot of time into something and then it settled before our opinion ever came out. So I never actually released my opinion on that issue.  
      And but, I know the issue well from the time I spent on that case at the time. And I know the arguments 
KLOBUCHAR:  You want to share them with us in your 
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I think it it is 
KLOBUCHAR:  remaining minute with me here?  
KAVANAUGH:  it it is a matter that, obviously, is the subject of current litigation and could come before me again. So I, as a matter of judicial independence, can't do so.   
      But I I will say, it's a very interesting issue, a question of precedent and the oral argument in the case, which is available publicly. It was fascinating because of the issue presented as you described it.  
KLOBUCHAR:  OK. How would you apply the First Amendment to a reporter's decision to protect a confidential source?  
KAVANAUGH:  So there is also important precedent on that matter that makes clear the importance of the relationships of reporters and their sources. Again, the criminal-civil divide there is something that I think has been part of the case law in the past where the criminal context has been deemed, in some cases, sufficiently compelling.   
      But that is set forth as an important part of the reporter's privilege. And the relationship with confidential sources is very important, I understand, to the role of journalists in bringing sunlight to American democracy.  
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Before we go to Senator Sasse, I'd like to not that we've had some good luck in confirming, this week, eight federal judges to lifetime appointments.  

GRASSLEY:  Eight 

GRASSLEY:  eight federal judges to lifetime appointments this week. Last week, we did seven judges. Twelve were confirmed without any objection from Democrats. And so, we've had a pretty good record finding of of being able to show that that you you you don't have anything to fear from lifetime appointments for federal judges, like we've heard a big issue it is today.   
      Go ahead.  
SASSE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      Judge, welcome back.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you.  
SASSE:  Congratulations on your last day of interviewing in your life. I'd like to talk about precedent. You've been a law professor. How how long have you been a professor?  
KAVANAUGH:  I started in 2007 was the first year. I've taught 12 separate calendar years.  
SASSE:  OK. Let's pretend you're a sixth grade civics teacher for our 20 minutes together, instead of a law professor. I think precedent's critically important, but I don't think the American people it's not something we debate in front of them much. So it's something that maybe we can benefit from having more shared understanding about.  
      Has the Supreme Court ever made a mistake?  
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court has made some major mistakes at time - Dred Scott, Plessy versus Ferguson, good examples.  
SASSE:  How how do you know when you have a mistake?  
KAVANAUGH:  Sometimes you know right away. And I think in those cases with the dissents written in those cases, those dissenters knew right away, and I think there were mistakes right away. Plessy versus Ferguson was wrong the day it was decided.  
SASSE:  It's 1896, and we knew it was wrong when it happened. What was the ruling count? Do we remember the vote?  
KAVANAUGH:  There was only one dissenter, Justice Harlan. The first Justice Harlan was the only dissenter in that case.  
SASSE:  OK. It's so close to McCain's event that I don't I know we shouldn't be joking right now, but I just want to talk about lunch. Republican senators have lunch together three times a week, and whenever we do, if somebody's phone goes off, it was always John McCain's.  
       
SASSE:  When he'd get when he'd get bored at lunch, he'd be watching CNN and he wouldn't know that it came on at full volume 10. So it just felt like a ghost of lunches past.   
       
      You wrote a really important article in Catholic Law Review last year, The Ten Principles of good umpiring. And it wasn't about you as basketball coach; it was about the job of a judge. I'm going to speed through them.   
      So I'm I'm oversimplifying, but I think your top 10 list was if you're a judge or, if you're an umpire, you can't be a partisan. You've got no rooting interest. You've got no fan favorites.  
      Number two, the rules have to exist before the game. Number three, you have to apply the rules consistently. Four, you can't remake the rules based on your preferences if your view of the game changes. Dez Bryant, a couple years ago, that 
       
SASSE:  catch at the at the goal line 

SASSE:  It may be the case that the NFL decides in the course of a year that the targeting penalty doesn't work. A judge doesn't get to remake that rule on the fly.  
      Number five, you've got a backbone or courage. Number six, you have to be able to tune out the crowd. Number seven, you have to have an open mind. You think you know what case is coming before you and people may present arguments that are different than you though.  
      Number eight, you need the right demeanor and temperament. Number nine, you have to work collegially with your colleagues. And number 10, you have to be good at explaining.  
      Rule number two, the rules have to exist before the game. You then go from having a kind of paragraph-by-paragraph structure, you pause and have a long 2B and you explain a little but about precedent.   
      Can you give us a 60 or 90 second view about how precedent relates to having rules of the game before the game?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes. Precedent is important for stability and predictability. And so, to know what the rules are ahead of time is important for good judging and for good umpiring. And to do it consistently with how it's been done before, I think, is part of the system of precedent.  
      The the point is when the rules are set ahead of time by the precedent or by the law, then you're not making up the rules as you go along in the heat of the moment, which will seem unfair, which will seem like you're a partisan because you're going to seem like you're favoring one side or another because of allegiance to that team or favoritism to that team rather than applying the rules ahead of time.   
      Which is why, in sports as you know well, Senator, because I know of your devotion to sports there are a lot of detailed rules that are set forth about how the game is played and how referees and umpires are supposed to call the game.   
      And that's to ensure that there is predictability, there is stability, that the players can rely on that and that it's overall, fairness, due process is not a word used often in the refereeing context but it really is an element of due process.   
      Notice about what the rules are ahead of time so that everyone has confidence in the fairness of the game, and that umpiring which is critical to the outcome of many games is done in a fair and impartial way.   
      So it it facilitates impartiality, integrity of the game, fairness of the game. And it's true for game sports, and it's true I think the analogy's very strong, frankly. And this is why I wrote that article, is because the chief justice, of course, had talked famously about the judges' umpire.   
      And because I yeah, coach and play a lot of sports and I really thought about the analogy, and I thought, "There are actually a lot of parallels between being a good judge and a good good umpire." I'm a connoisseur of umpiring.   
       
SASSE:  So I want to jump in here. Because I agree with you that the analogy is strong in type, but I think it's imperfect, right?   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.   
SASSE:  Because in a football my dad was a football coach in a football game, everything that's going to happen inside the four corners of that 120 yards with end zones, is predictable in that Woody Hayes comes off the sideline in 1971 and punches a player in the face. That was new, and yet it was still nonparticipation.   
      There was there was a rule, you could only have 11 players. Coach can't play, another 12th player can't play. And so there was a rule that spoke to that.   
      And what you're doing, it's not as defined because the cases that may originate are not as perfectly cabinable if that's a word as as in football, what might happen.   
      So help me understand the distinction between judging as umpiring and the fact that the Supreme Court has made decisions in the past it isn't the case that every decision the Supreme Court has ever made is right and is now a part of the permanent rulebook. You sometimes have to throw them out.   
      So, sixth grade level, help us understand how, from 1896 to 1954, you've repeatedly called Brown the greatest moment in Supreme Court history. I think it's one of the greatest moments in American history as well.   
      In those 58 years, the court was wrong for that whole time and yet the way we think about precedent, we might have our sixth graders thinking we should always take every received decision as right. So how do you how do you reconcile the two?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well what the the factors the Supreme Court looks at, or whether the decision's not just wrong but grievously wrong. Whether it's inconsistent with the law that's grown up around it, whether what the real-world consequences are, including workability, and then reliance.   
      In one of the genius moves of Thurgood Marshall, among many genius moves he made as a lawyer, was to start litigating case by case. He knew Plessy was wrong the day it was decided.   
      But he also knew the as a matter of litigation strategy, the way to bring about this change was to try to create a body of law that undermined the foundations of Plessy.   
      And he started litigating cases and showing, case by case, that separate was not really equal. And he did it in cases like Sweatt v. Painter and many other cases. And he built up a record over time, that by the time he went to the Supreme Court to argue Brown v. Board of Education, he had shown its inconsistency with the law that had built up around it.   
      For those who weren't otherwise as quickly on board with the idea that Plessy was wrong the day it was decided. And 
       
SASSE:  I want to I want to 
       
KAVANAUGH:  He was taking no chances.   
SASSE:  I want to interrupt you because I want you to keep coming forward, these 58 years. But just as a civics commercial, what you're describing right here, in the new documentary, "Marshall," every mom and dad and teacher ought to show it to their kids. I actually got to see it before it was out because Senator Harris gave me a copy, and my kids and I watched it before it was public.   
      But everybody should watch the Marshall documentary that's going through the history of what he was doing as a long-term litigation strategy. But continue, please.   
KAVANAUGH:  Well I think that by the time it got to Brown v. Board of Education, that the foundations for overturning Plessy had been strengthened by showing what the real-world consequences were, and by building up a body of law that was inconsistent with the principle the erroneous principle set forth in Plessy.   
      And so he had a strategic vision of how to do this, which was brilliant. And he effectuated, along with a team of lawyers over time, litigating case after case after case and building up factual records that would show the harm, the as the Supreme Court ultimately said, "the badge of inferiority" from separate educational facilities and separate separate facilities more generally.   
      And that's that's how he was able to show that the precedent, even with principles of stare decisis in place, should be overturned.   
SASSE:  But so if you're on the court during that period, that 58-year period I want to get, at some point, to this distinction between precedent, super-precedent, precedent, unprecedent, super-duper precedent but one of the reasons you think this is because of the Harlan dissent.   
      So back back up. And, again, sixth sixth grade level. What's the purpose of a dissent? Why do we write them?   
KAVANAUGH:  We write dissents because we, in a multi-member court, disagree with the decision that is being made by the majority, and because we think that the issue is sufficiently important if you're on the Supreme Court that perhaps a future court will pay attention to your decision.   
      Or in a statutory case, sometimes maybe Congress will think that your interpretation of the statute was better, and maybe Congress will update the statute to reflect your view.   
      But the purpose of dissents in constitutional cases I think Justice Ginsburg has said this, Justice Scalia used to say this dissents often speak to the next generation. And it's important therefore, in constitutional cases of importance, to have those dissents.   
      And Harlan's dissent was a was a classic. It had some lines that are very memorable, about the separation of the races in the Louisiana rail cars and the that law just that law just recently been enacted, so this was an example, after the 14th Amendment after the Civil War and the 14th Amendment, there was a period of of positive movement, at least some positive movement not complete by any stretch.  
      And Strauder v. West Virginia reflects that. In 1880, when the Supreme Court says, "What is this but the law should be the same for the black and the white." That was a case where African-Americans were being excluded from juries, all-white juries, and the Supreme Court said no to that.   
      And but then progress any progress went backwards. It was reflected in the Plessy v. Ferguson decision, which upheld the separation of the races in that in that case.   
      And so the Harlan dissent was very important for setting forth a clear principle rooted in the text of the Constitution, and rooted in the principles of the 14th Amendment. And subsequently vindicated, at least on paper, of course, in Brown versus Board of Education.   
SASSE:  Why do you write a concurring dissent?   
KAVANAUGH:  So you can write a separate dissent or a concurring opinion in the majority opinion. Sometimes you'll write a concurring opinion to the majority opinion because you have a different rationale for reaching the same result. So you might have a 
SASSE:  So who's your audience?   
KAVANAUGH:  Your audience that's a good question. Sometimes it's also future courts, but oftentimes when you're at the Supreme Court level I think. Obviously don't know, but I think they're writing concurring opinions sometimes to influence or or suggest things to lower courts about how this case either another issue, or a related issue, or a tangential issue should be resolved or thought about in the lower courts.   
      Sometimes the concurring opinion is written in the future Supreme Court that might be five years down the road about an issue that's related to the issue being decided by the majority opinion. There are lots of different purposes that one might have for a concurring opinion when you're on the Supreme Court, at least as I've read them over the years.   
SASSE:  So let me give you a hypothetical. You're on the court and there's a six to three decision and you're on the losing side and so you write your dissent and the next year there's a case that looks to you to be almost exactly the same, so you don't grant cert, you don't vote for it but other people do. And so a case is coming back before you. And I know you're going to tell me that you need to be open minded and maybe the case is really different and you were wrong when you didn't grant cert.   
      But just bracket that problem for a minute. Let's pretend you're in a six-three case, you lost. Then there's a new case that comes before you. Are you supposed to have the view of the majority the next year even though you disagreed last year, or do you write the same dissent again?   
KAVANAUGH:  So as a matter of precedent, the ordinary course is that you follow the precedent of the Supreme Court, even if you were on the losing side, maybe especially if you were on the losing side. There are times where justices have persisted in their dissents repeatedly over the years, particularly in certain critical constitutional issues or sometimes they have not persisted in the dissent but joined the majority, but said I still agree with myself back in the prior precedent where I had dissented originally.   
      You see different approaches to this by different justices on different issues. I don't think it's a one-size-fits-all answer to your question, at least in terms of what the justices have done over time on that particular question. I most famously justices Marshall and Brennan dissented in every death penalty case because they did not accept the precedent of the Supreme Court that allowed the death penalty under the Eighth Amendment.   
SASSE:  So how do you imagine you would act in that circumstance, if there's a difference there's a diversity of views across justices in our history but if if you got the same case coming back the next year, do you dissent again or do you accept a majority opinion? Could you write the majority opinion?   
KAVANAUGH:  Well that's what I I think a good judge does, which is once the decision's been made, you accept the precedent subject to the rules of stare decisis and yes, there are lots of historical examples where that has happened and that's been done. Justice White had been a dissenter in Miranda versus Arizona famously and then wrote many decisions applying Miranda subsequent to that, accepting the decision.   
      Chief Justice Rehnquist of course ultimately wrote the decision where the question was would it overrule Miranda and wrote the decision reaffirming Miranda because he decided that as at that point it had did not meet the conditions for overruling a precedent in that case.   
      So I think ordinarily ordinarily you've you get on board the precedent but you might still write separately to say I think this was a huge mistake and we should go back to a different approach. You see that sometimes. I think there are lots there are lots of permutations to the question you're asking, Senator, but in the ordinary course  
SASSE:  I want to ask them, but the Chairman will only let me have three and a half more minutes. He's miserly about this.   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.   
SASSE:  What's the difference between an appellate court judge's job and a Supreme Court justice's job?   
KAVANAUGH:  There are many. I think that 
SASSE:  Specifically with regard to questions where there's been a precedent.   
KAVANAUGH:  So at the D.C. circuit level or the court of appeals level, we follow vertical stare decisis, absolutely. And that means that we are not permitted to deviate from a Supreme Court precedent. With respect to Supreme Court or let's put it this way. When I'm on the D.C. circuit and we're reconsidering en banc a prior precedent of our own, we can do that at times if the conditions for overruling a precedent are met.   
      We can't do that with respect to Supreme Court precedent. We have to follow that. And why is that? Because that's there's one Supreme Court in our hierarchical system and lower courts have to follow that or there'd be chaos in the federal system if lower courts weren't strictly bound to follow the precedents of the Supreme Court.   
SASSE:  Is there a single Supreme Court justice today who agrees with every accented opinion of the court?   
KAVANAUGH:  I think that's got to be zero.   
SASSE:  Right.   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.   
SASSE:  So how how does that get netted out in the next controversial case when you use these terms, precedent, super precedent, precedent on precedent? How does that get netted out?   
KAVANAUGH:  Ordinarily it gets netted out by the court following the precedent until unless and until the conditions for overturning something are met, Brown versus Board being the most prominent example of one that happened, the Erie Railroad case, overruling Swift versus Tyson. There are examples throughout our history where that's happened. But it's rare and ordinarily what happens is once a decision's been decided, that's what stare decisis means, you follow decision that has been set forth by the Supreme Court subject to the rules of stare decisis.   
      And you see that time again. That's part of stability, that's part of predictability, that's part of impartiality, that's part of public confidence in the rule of law that it's not just going to move pillar to post, that the law is stable and foundational. Again, it's not Brown versus Board shows it's not absolute and that's that's a good thing, but it is critically important to the impartiality and stability and predictability of the law.   
SASSE:  And the fact that Harlan should have been the guiding opinion for those 58 years isn't true just for the Supreme Court, it was also true for appellate courts. Could an appellate judge have gone with Harlan in 1940?   
KAVANAUGH:  An appellate judge was bound by the precedent of the Supreme Court and that would have been, sadly, Plessy versus Ferguson at that time.   
SASSE:  So this the the core difference here for the Supreme Court is there's greater latitude to reconsider the previous errors of the court.   
KAVANAUGH:  Of the Supreme Court, that's correct, Senator.   
SASSE:  I'm I have 30 seconds left, so I got to get my last one out to to get in under the bell. I'll shift gears just a tiny little bit. What is the Declaration of Independence? In in what way the Constitution is fundamental law for us. What's the Declaration of Independence?   
KAVANAUGH:  So the Declaration of Independence first of all is a legal document legally declaring independence, of course, from Great Britain, but it also sets forth a series of grievances against us the monarchy, the system. Many of which are reflected in the Constitution in terms of protections that are in the Constitution.  
      If you trace to the Declaration of Independence, you see the grievances they had reflected in protections we have in the Constitution, starting with the separation of powers, but also including the individual protections whether it is ex post facto laws or freedom of speech or quartering the third amendment, not much litigated as we know, senator, but all you can trace it.   
      But this Declaration of Independence is a set of principles that I think guide our beliefs:  life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, all men are created equal, all people are created equal in our society. And those principles have guided us, inspired us, have been the source of our liberty, the source of the much of what we have done as a country on since the Declaration of Independence. But it's not law the same become one of the Constitution is law that's applied in courts.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Coons.  
COONS:  Thank you, Chairman Grassley.  

COONS:  Thank you, Chairman Grassley. Thank you, Judge Kavanaugh, to you, to Ashley, to your family and friends. Thank you for being here, and for the opportunity to engage with you again. You've certainly shown great persistence and engagement.  

COONS:  In the last round, we talked about the bedrock constitutional principle that no one should be above the law, including the president, which is a principal foundational to our democracy. It's about more than any one person, any one president.   
      And I just want to continue asking you about the president's obligation to cooperate with the federal investigation and how your view of the president's power might implicate an investigation.  
      As we all know in 1974, senior officials in the Nixon administration and the campaign were on trial for crimes related to Watergate, and with so many former White House and Justice Department officials implicated in crimes, then President Nixon felt threatened by the investigation. So special prosecutor Archibald Cox, when he issued a grand jury subpoena for the Watergate tapes, audio recordings of White House conversations reasonably believing they contained evidence of criminal activity, the president acted.   
      Instead of complying with the subpoena for tapes and providing the evidence, President Nixon had the special prosecutor fired and he fought the subpoena for the tapes all the way to the Supreme Court.   
      I want to focus on the question of the president's action in firing the special prosecutor, because that's what I think is a key issue here.   
      Judge, when President Nixon fired Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox, did he violate the law or the Constitution?  

KAVANAUGH:  I I know that the regulation in place for Leon Jaworski after the firing had special protection for conspiring and I think that s become the model for the regulations. I'm not recalling the specifics of the Cox regulation in place at the time.  
COONS:  I'll tell you that there are for-cause restrictions in place in regulation at the time. Given that, do you think firing the special prosecutor violated the law or the Constitution?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, if it violated the regulation, it violated the regulation.  
COONS:  Would it have violated the Constitution? What I am getting at, judge, is your view of presidential power and whether or not it would be a violation of the Constitution, for there to be these for-cause restrictions on the president's ability to fire the special prosecutor.   
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I think that the Supreme Court in United States vs. Richard Nixon analyzed the specific regulation at issue in that case, and actually relied on the specific regulation in finding that the case was justiciable under the precise terms of the regulation in place of the time. In fact, the court analyzed that in really specific detail, pointed out that so long as a 

COONS:  Let me be clear about the point I'm trying to get to.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK.  
COONS:  It's your views about whether or not when President Nixon fired Archibald Cox, he obstructed justice in violation of the Constitution, where the firing itself violated the Constitution. It's important to know your views on U.S. v. Nixon as well and we'll turn to that, but I'm interested in your understanding of the Constitution and whether or not it prohibits restrictions on the president's ability to fire a special prosecutor at will.  
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court said and so you're asking my views , my views are what the precedent says. In other words, I follow precedent. The precedent of the Supreme Court in U.S. v. Nixon case did apply that regulation, analyzed 
COONS:  And judge, U.S. v. Nixon was unanimous, correct. It was unanimous, 8-0.   
COONS:  Are you aware of any justice having questioned the decision in U.S. v. Nixon since then?  
KAVANAUGH:  No. I've called one of four greatest moments in Supreme Court history, U.S. v. Richard Nixon.   
COONS:  You have, and that is exactly what I want to get to because you've also in another context, as we talked about yesterday, in a roundtable in 1999, volunteered, unprompted, that maybe Nixon was wrongly decided. Do you think U.S. v. Nixon was wrongly decided?  
KAVANAUGH:  I have said it was one of the four greatest decisions and correct decisions in terms of the specific regulation at issue in the case, in the court's holding in the context of a criminal trial subpoena, that the subpoena for the information, the tapes was enforceable in that context. And that's what I've said before publicly about the Nixon case. And that 1999 
COONS:  So you would agree that it was correctly decided? Did I just hear you right?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, of course. When I say it's one of the great when I say something is the greatest that means I agree with it. And the point was that under the specific regulation at issue in that case, a criminal trial subpoena for the information, and it was a moment of judicial independence, a moment where the court, I think came together as a unanimous opinion written by Chief Justice Burger. So that's important moment in the in the courts history.  
COONS:  So you would agree then, just following the U.S. v. Nixon precedent that a court can order a president to produce records in response to a grand jury subpoena or can be compelled to testify in front of a grand jury?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm not going to answer hypotheticals about how to apply U.S. v. Nixon.   
COONS:  But that is the holding?  
KAVANAUGH:  The holding of U.S. v. Nixon was that the subpoena for the information in the context of the criminal trial had to could be enforced and that therefore given the regulation at issue in the case, the case was justiciable and the subpoena could be enforced. I'm not going answer hypotheticals about how it applies in other context. By the way, I should add, that that the context of what you have up there is incorrect, but I so but I've said Nixon was one of the four greatest moments in Supreme Court history; I've written that several times before, including 1999.   
COONS:  You have.  
KAVANAUGH:  The context of that if you want to know, was a roundtable deal with me and some lawyers who represented the Clinton administration, we were just talking, reflecting on the on the independent counsel investigation. And my point to them, they they were concerned that the subpoenas that were enforced by the courts during the Starr and counsel investigation had weakened the presidency. That was the position of the Clinton lawyers, and I said well we were just following U.S. v. Nixon. That was my position. So my position was either you're wrong or Nixon's wrong to the Clinton lawyers, and that's the context of that comment, the tone of voice there makes the printed words look much different from how they were intended and I think that's been seriously mischaracterized, frankly.   
COONS:  And the striking thing about the context, which we discussed before, and I made clear in a letter I was going to question you about, is that Phil Lacovara, who was facilitating this roundtable, who was a Watergate prosecutor who argued U.S. v. Nixon in a later interview said he didn't think you were just being provocative, this was just some academic give and take with some Clinton lawyers.   
      Lacovara's been quoted saying that statement that perhaps Nixon was wrongly decided was Brett staking out his jurist credential approach since law school. It seems Lacovara thought you were serious about raising a question about whether U.S. v. Nixon was wrongly decided because, and this is what you said at the round table, Nixon took away the power of the president to control information in the executive branch.   
KAVANAUGH:  Right, and that's why the Clinton lawyers I thought were wrong. That was my point.   
COONS:  Why should the person be investigated  
KAVANAUGH:  The point - the point - the point I was making was that the Clinton lawyers who were - were saying that the Independent Counsel Office had weakened the presidency, I was saying to the Clinton lawyers it wasn't the star office who had done that, it was United States versus Nixon that had done that.   
      And then I pointed out to the Clinton lawyers, and I think we've discussed this in the office - had a good discussion in your office about this was I said but you're unwilling - I said this to Clinton lawyers - you are unwilling to challenge United States versus Nixon.   
      Well that was the governing precedent, and that's the precedent we were litigating, and that's where your concern should be and that's the context in which that line was said. With all respect to Mr. Lacovara, I think he's - he's misunderstanding what I was saying there, and here's how I know he was misunderstanding because in an contemporaneous law review article at that same time I specifically talked about U.S. v. Nixon and the importance of that precedent.  
      So that's how I know he was misunderstanding the point of what I respectfully think he was misunderstanding the point of what I was saying there.   
COONS:  So if U.S. v. Nixon was rightly decided, was Morrison v. Olson rightly decided?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well I've talked about Morrison v. Olson at -   
COONS:  That was the whole point of our exchange yesterday and that's the root of my core concern. And what I'm getting at in this whole line  
KAVANAUGH:  I've associated myself with Justice Kagan's position on Morrison v. Olson.   
COONS:  And given our exchange yesterday, I - I went back and looked at presidential administration, her article where she expressly rejects Unitarianism, as she calls it, the unitary executive theory, the theory that you don't just mention in passing but expound in your PHH dissent.  
        
      And it's exactly this reason that I have concerns, Judge.   
KAVANAUGH:  But I specifically recognize, Senator, and I understand the point, but I specifically call Humphrey's executor the precedent that we must follow in the independent agency context.   
      Humphrey's executor of course accepts independent agencies as did I in that case as precedent of the Supreme Court that I've referred to as entrenched. The only thing I was - the only question in PHH was can we go further than that kind of independent agency consistent with Article II or does Humphrey's executor draw the line that sets for the permissible boundaries under which Congress can establish independent agencies.   
COONS:  In an - in an exchange you had with Senator Feinstein earlier today, this was exactly the question where I don't think you ever really answered it. As I understand your dissent in the CFPB case, PHH versus CFPB, your exact problem with the structure Congress created for this independent agency was that the director was not removable at will by the president.   
      The director is removable, but only for a cause. That's the line that I'm drawing here between your concerns or criticisms in one context a long time ago by U.S. v. Nixon, your comments about being able to fire the prosecutor at will in a number of law review articles, your comments in some round tables and discussions in 2016 and the dissent in PHH and the structure of the CFPB.   
      What offended your constitutional sensibilities, as I understand your dissent, Judge, this year in PHH was that the president couldn't fire at will the director. And that's the whole reason of my asking you about did the president violate the constitution in your understanding in firing the special prosecutor in Watergate.  
      It is a coherent theory, you can have a coherent theory that the Congress can't restrain the president's ability to fire at will lesser executive branch officials. I just want to have a clear understanding of it.   
KAVANAUGH:  I wasn't understanding the question, so the - the first part of the - the question was part of your premise -   
COONS:  So - so earlier today, let's return to an earlier exchange you had with Senator Feinstein. She's asking you about your dissent in PHH. What was it that caused you to write an opinion - what was the constitutional view, the underpinnings of your decision that having a single director removable for a cause by the president was constitutionally unsound?  
KAVANAUGH:  OK, I can explain, can I get a minute?  
COONS:  Yes.   
KAVANAUGH:  OK. So I was following a precedent of the Supreme Court from about 10 years ago, Free Enterprise Fund case, I had written a dissent at the D.C. Circuit in that case, a novel independent agency structure for the PCAOB, the Accounting Oversight Board.   
COONS:  I'm familiar.   
KAVANAUGH:  I wrote a dissent saying that the - that structure departed from the traditional independent agency structure I dissented. The Supreme Court took the case, agreed with my dissent in a majority opinion by Chief Justice Roberts saying that the outer lines, at least as I interpret what Chief Justice Roberts said for the court, the outer lines of independent agencies or the traditional independent agency structures set forth in Humphrey's executor.   
      At least that's how I interpreted the opinion. And in the -   
COONS:  But wasn't Humphrey's executor also, Judge, critically about removable at will versus for a cause?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, and that's - so long as it's set -   
COONS:  And isn't this exactly why the majority in your circuit said that your dissent flew in the face of Morrison?   
KAVANAUGH:  They were - they thought Humphrey's executor allowed structures beyond the multi-member agency that was upheld in Humphrey's executor. I disagreed based on the free - the same thing had been said about my dissent in Free Enterprise Fund, Supreme Court took it and agreed with my dissent in Free Enterprise Fund.   
      I thought this case was very - is very similar to what I had written in Free Enterprise Fund, in fact I block quote my old dissent.   
COONS:  But what you didn't say in response to Senator Feinstein's question that I'm still trying to get an answer to, wasn't your core concern in your PHH dissent that the president could not fire at will the director of the CFPB?  
KAVANAUGH:  That - that was the concern because that departed from history to have a single director independent agency structure, not the multi-member independent agency structure that had existed in Humphrey's executor. And that had  
COONS:  You can how that then raises questions and concerns about your distinction between fireable at will or fireable for cause. And as this body has taken up and debated whether or not it is permissible for us to legislate a protection for special prosecutors that they can only be fired for cause not at will, your repeated citation of the Scalia dissent in Morrison v. Olson rises again to the fore.   
      Thus my question to you, will you also agree that Morrison was correctly decided? It is good law, it's a settled case, you may have, in a response to a previous question, said oh it's a one off case about a now extinguished statute, but as I said yesterday why then pick it out of the whole constellation of constitutional opinions as the one you most want to put a nail in its coffin?   
      Why the animus against this if you don't think it was wrongly decided?''  
KAVANAUGH:  I said what I said about Morrison but Justice Kagan said that it's one of the greatest dissents ever written by Justice Scalia which unless I am misreading something 
COONS:  You are misreading something. Judge with all due respect I went back to look at presidential administration by Justice Kagan after you cited it to me yesterday. That is clearly not what she's saying. She is not endorsing the unitary executive.  
KAVANAUGH:  You're conflating 
COONS:  She thinks Scalia wrote a beautiful dissent in my view.  
KAVANAUGH:  You don't think she agrees with it?  
COONS:  I don't think she agrees with it at all.  
KAVANAUGH:  I think when she calls something the greatest, I think she probably agrees with it.  
COONS:  But let's - let's get to what you believe. What I'm encouraged by is that you've said when you call U.S. v. Nixon the greatest, you think it's rightly decided. What I'm not getting the answer from you on is whether you think Morrison V. Olson was rightly decided but I would be interested in hearing whether you think Griswold versus Connecticut or Eisenstadt versus Baird were correctly decided. An opinion that justices Kennedy, Ginsburg, Roberts and Alito proffered when they were before this committee in their confirmation hearing.   
      Were those correctly decided?  
KAVANAUGH:  I - I think I said last night in response to Senator Harris who asked me about whether I agreed with Senator - with Justice Alito and Chief Justice Roberts on that and I said yes.  
COONS:  That they were correctly deciding  
KAVANAUGH:  I answered that I agreed with Justice Alito and Chief Justice Roberts.  
COONS:  Can I just take a minute and explore your view of the independent counsel. The idea that the Independent Counsel Statute is unconstitutional, because you have written and spoken about that repeatedly, in 1998 and 1999 in law journal articles and in public speeches. As I perhaps pointedly raised yesterday in 2016 you called the Independent Counsel Statute a Constitutional travesty.   
KAVANAUGH:  That's what Senator Durbin had also in essence called it.  
COONS:  Well what I'm concerned about is what you said about it because 
KAVANAUGH:  And that's what the entire 
COONS:  you are the nominee 
KAVANAUGH: that's what the entire Congress 
COONS: for the Supreme Court, not Senator Durbin.  
KAVANAUGH:  the entire Congress had basically taken that view in 1999 that it was restrained, unaccountable, a disaster.  
COONS:  Let's say it was widely panned 
KAVANAUGH:  But it's very different.  
COONS:  But you chose to call it out as a Constitutional travesty and you're the nominee for the Supreme Court in front of me. So just give me a moment. While you worked for Ken Starr as independent counsel under the Independent Counsel Statute, you took an oath of office to defend the Constitution, correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  As interpreted by the you know you follow precedent in the Supreme Court. If the Supreme Court has upheld something, you still - still work in your public service.  
COONS:  You took an oath, you're engaged in public service, you believe then as we all do that it was your job to act in compliance with the Constitution but you also fully utilized the tools available to the independent counsel, right? You were part of a team that saw a subpoena against President Clinton for evidence, for DNA evidence, yes?  
KAVANAUGH:  Can I get 30 seconds?   
COONS:  I think this is a yes or no question. I'm down to two minutes.  
KAVANAUGH:  Can I get 30 seconds?  
COONS:  If it's your last 30 seconds.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK. I want to emphasize that the special counsel system that's in place now is something that I've specifically, repeatedly, and expressly said is consistent with our traditions in my 1999 "Georgetown Law Journal" article and in the CFPB decision. The special counsel system I've said is part of our tradition. That is the system in place. You're talking about something that has not been in place for 20 years.  
COONS:  That's right. The Independent Counsel Statute - that structure hasn't been in place for 20 years. My core concern first was that you were perfectly happy to use all the tools available to the independent counsel when you worked there. After working there discovered an enthusiasm for its invalidation as a constitutional matter.   
      In trying to understand that, I've dug into your writings, your opinions, your speeches and concluded that you hold a view of the executive branch, which I believe you made clear this year in your PHH dissent, which I believe is in line with Justice Scalia's view as espoutedin his dissent in Morrison v. Olson which is that there has to be in the president as the chief law enforcement officer of the United States this is the unitary executive theory, not mine, the ability to fire at will any special prosecutor and the ability and I've got quotes from you, in different contexts saying that's what's appropriate in this traditional special counsel setting, like the Watergate period, is if the president disagrees with the conduct of the prosecutor, he should simply fire him and bear the consequences.  
      My point essentially is this, I'm convinced that you said repeatedly you support the traditional practice of appointing special counsels. But you haven't acknowledged you've supported this practice because the president has retained the power to fire the special counsel at will. And those of us who have tried to enact statutes that might restrain the president in some way by putting in place for cause removal restrictions have had thrown back at us the dissent from Morrison v. Olson, a dissent which you embrace and cite and a dissent which I think reveals a deep commitment to a view of the president in our current context is profoundly dangerous.   
      And I simply wish Judge, and we'll have a third round to explore this, I simply wish you would be clear with us and the American people about your view of the scope of presidential power and what its consequences might be. I don't think you're being direct with me about that because I think to be direct with me about that in this context would put your nomination at risk.  
KAVANAUGH:  I I respectfully disagree Senator. You're talking about a statute that has been nonexistent for 20 years.  
COONS:  That's no longer what I'm talking about your honor. As you know, what I'm talking about is your view of president power as made clear in speeches and in writings and in a decision this year. We're not talking about the independent counsel statute now, we're talking about the scope of presidential authority and I think it has consequences for our nation.   
GRASSLEY:  You can answer.  
COONS:  You are clearly a capable and good man and a good neighbor and a good coach and we've heard a lot about that. What I want to hear more about is an honest answer about your view of presidential power.  
GRASSLEY:  You can answer.  
KAVANAUGH:  You're talking, if I can answer uninterrupted for 
GRASSLEY:  You can answer on the 10 minutes I didn't use.  
KAVANAUGH:  Respectfully Senator, first of all I appreciate your care and we've know each other since law school; we've been friendly with each other since law school and your devotion to this. Respectfully I believe you're talking about a statute that has not been in place since 1999. Secondly the special counsel system, I've specifically written about multiple times and approved.   
      Thirdly, if there were some kind of protection for cause protection or some other kind of protection that were different from the old Independent Counsel Statute, I said that I would keep an open mind about that so I have not said anything to rule that out and finally, I've reaffirmed repeatedly, or I've applied repeatedly, the precedent of Humphrey's Executor for traditional independent agencies and have never suggested otherwise. I've referred to that as an entrenched precedent. So those are - and I've referred to U.S. v. Nixon as one of the greatest decisions in Supreme Court history.  
GRASSLEY:  We will soon take a break and then Senator Flake is up next. But before there's a couple of things. One, it will be a 15 minute break but if you can make it seven and half minutes, I'd appreciate it. My - I'm - I'm not ordering you to do that, I just said I would appreciate it. But before you go, I want to get back to this Justice Kagan's comment on Morrison. And this is something that you and the Senator from Delaware have discussed a long time. Somehow the only commentary on Morrison Olson is from Kagan's Law Review article, presidential administration, but she also said this in a magazine, Stanford Lawyer, three years ago. And it says, Justice Kagan has called Justice Scalia's dissent in Morrison one of the greatest dissents ever written and said that every year it gets better. But we're in recess.  
        
GRASSLEY:  Tell me when you're ready, Judge.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Flake?  
FLAKE:  Thank you. Judge Kavanaugh, if it's the fourth quarter and you're down by one point, what play do you call and which one of the young ladies in the front row do you give the ball to?  
       
KAVANAUGH:  I can't choose, they're all great players as you know, Senator. It's awesome to have them all here.  
FLAKE:  Do you want to let us know who they are and what - what your team is here?  
KAVANAUGH:  They - they - these are a variety of teams that I've coached. So I started coaching many years ago and some of these girls are as old as 10th grade now, so they're older than my daughters. I started coaching the 5th, 6th team then, I guess four years ago.  
      So the oldest girls, Caroline and Abigail, 10th grade 10th graders, Madison, 9th grader.   
      The girls over here well, these are my two, of course, and Keegan, and Coco, and Anna, and Shawnee, Quinn, Sophie are all here, and so let's see, we've got Liza's going into 5th grade, Morgan's in 7th, Keegan's in fifth, Coco's in 5th, Anna's in 7th, Shawnee's in 7th, Quinn's in 6th, and Sophie is in 7th.   
      So I think I got it all right? Yes.   
        
         
FLAKE:  Well thank you.   
KAVANAUGH:  And they're all awesome players. They really are. I mean, they are tough as nails, right, Caroline?   
      Carol Carolin Connahan, no one tougher.   
FLAKE:  There goes my whole line of questioning, I have to say.   
        
      But well thank you all for coming here. Welcome here.   
      Let me ask a variation on the question that Senator Sasse asked a few minutes ago. He asked you what Supreme Court decisions over the years were decided wrongly. You answered. You've decided over the past 12 years about 307 cases, I believe, on the circuit court. Are there any that you look back on and say, "I just didn't get it right," or, "This one hasn't held up well over time"?   
      And I know that's a difficult question. I mean, as politicians, that's a tough thing for us to answer, but I'd I'd be glad to, you know, tell you a number of cases where Senator Sasse got it wrong.   
        
SASSE:  And I will reserve my time for rebuttal.   
        
KAVANAUGH:  Well, and Senator, I'll I'll point out where I reconsidered something in one case, so the Bahlul National Security case that I had, one of the questions in that case was what did the law of war mean in Section 821?   
      And I'd referenced it in a prior case as being limited solely to the international law of war, and then after reflection and actually after the Deputy Solicitor General for President Obama argued in our court, an oral argument, he planted a seed in me that I had interpreted it too narrowly and that it included not just the international law of war but the U.S. historical practice.   
      And I went back and really thought about that. He made a compelling case at oral argument, and I went back and dug deeper and studied it and ultimately concluded he was right, what he had said at oral argument, and I've referenced that in my subsequent Bahlul opinion, that based on the arguments of the Deputy Solicitor General, I had gone back it's like a I guess like a replay official. If you you know, I'd made the call in the original case, but gone back and looked at it again carefully and studied it over and over again, and went back to the history and concluded he was right.   
      So that's one example where I myself, in one of my opinions pointed out that in a previous decision, I had underinterpreted the scope of one statute.   
FLAKE:  Going a little further there, which ones have you struggled with? Which ones were the most difficult, and and how did you deal with those?   
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I I think what Justice Kennedy used to say in response to that question, that's something always comes into my head, which when he was always asked what's the hardest case, what's the most difficult case, he'd always say, "The one I'm working on right now."   
FLAKE:  Right, right.   
KAVANAUGH:  And I think that's I think that's there's something to that, which is every case, you want to give it your all and you're focused on the case you're working on at that moment.   
      There are of course more responsive to your question, I think, what Justice Kennedy said is correct, but perhaps more directly responsive to your question, I of course think national security cases are quite difficult and quite important, because you know the significance of them.   
      But so too every case has an effect on real people in the real world, so I want to give every single case, give it my all. I don't treat any case as a second-tier case. I treat every case as the most important case, and that's why I think Justice Kennedy's comment really does resonate with me and does point out something, which is to the litigant before you in that particular case, that's the most important case they'll ever have. It's probably their only case they'll ever have, and it's important that I treat as the most important case for me at that moment in time and while I'm deciding it.   
FLAKE:  Can you talk briefly a little about the process that you've undergone in the appellate court? It'll be a little different at the Supreme Court level, but when a case comes before you, you sit down with your clerks, I'm sure, and assign research to them. How do they frequently work with the other clerks, compare notes? Do you do that with the other judges? How does it usually work, and how might that be different with the job you're applying for?   
KAVANAUGH:  I think there are a lot of similarities to the Supreme Court in terms of the process, from my time clerking for Justice Kennedy, at least my experience there and seeing how it works. Now so in in in basic terms, what I do is I I read the briefs very carefully, I have my clerks prepare binders, many, many binders of all the cases I need to read, of all I like to know the law review articles and treatises on point. I like to go back and see if there are any historical materials that might be and they're all in the binders.   
      Then I'll talk about it with the clerks. I'll have one clerk who's handling it, but sometimes talk about it with all the clerks, about my tentative views.   
      The judges, interestingly, do not talk about the case ahead of time with each other, and the the reason for that is we each want to come into the oral argument having formed our own tentative approaches and questions and not having been influenced by maybe, well, this is what the other judge thinks, and so that will subtly influence you, but if we come into the oral argument with three independent perspectives, the practice has been that'll help us reach a more informed decision, each of us will be prepared.   
      Then at the oral argument itself, it's so important. We learn from the lawyers, but we also learn from each other at the oral argument, the questions similarly to the way this process works. You hear the questions of other senators, and and that sparks thoughts for you to ask questions, and and other senators to ask questions. So too for the judges.   
      Then we conference right after oral argument, and we give our tentative views and go around and debate and discuss, and it's very collegial and there's a lot of fluidity in that discussion. It's not as it's not as here's my position and that' it. It's never I for 12 years, I've never been in a single conference where any judge has said anything like that. Rather, it's a, "Here's what I'm thinking. What are you thinking?" And we go around and go in turns and then discuss it and reach a tentative resolution.   
      And then we write it up. One judge is assigned to draft up the opinion, and writes that's an intense process for me, and I think for all judges, of draft after draft after draft, and I talked about that to get it exactly right.   
      I want it to be clear, I want it to be consistent with precedent, and I don't want a I want the losing party to think they've gotten a fair shake, I want the affected parties to be able to understand it, to be as clear as possible, and that discipline of writing sometimes convinces you you might have gotten it wrong when you first were thinking about it, and sometimes you change 180 sometimes, but often will just shift your views.   
      But the writing is such a discipline. That's an important the whole thing is a process with three judges or nine on the Supreme Court that is designed to make sure you get it right, and so the collective decision-making process combined with the discipline of preparing and the discipline of oral argument, the discipline of writing it out.   
      That's why judges, when they come here, are very reluctant when they get a hypothetical to just give a one-off answer without going through that process. Process protects us as judges. It protects the the people who are affected by our decisions. So we are we love process because we are used to process and process, in our view, helps us make better, more informed decisions.   
FLAKE:  Thanks. Let me talk a little about what I touched on yesterday. Obviously the independence of the judiciary and our separation of powers are what are at issue here. And the most important questions I think you've been asked are are about that.   
      Senator Coons and I, along with a few others, traveled to Southern Africa a few months ago. And we met there with the constitutional court of South Africa.   
      And at a time when just a few weeks before, or a month before, they had ruled against the sitting president. On expenditure of funds issue and a few other things. But rendered a decision against the president of the country, the executive, that allowed the the parliament, then, to go in and remove him.   
      And and we we talked about that. And they and and marveled at how this country or this country of South Africa had had such a a court that understood their role and how important it was to be completely independent of the executive.   
      One of the justices put it quite well. He said, "We we can't allow the executive to climb over the lectern." I thought that that was an image that that is apropos here as well. There have to be some limits to executive power where the head of the executive branch, the president, in our case, cannot climb over the lectern.  
      And and in many cases, we look just north to Zimbabwe, where, for the past 37 years, Robert Mugabe had over a period of time, climbed over the lectern enough or to put judges in place that would rule whatever he wanted.   
      And the genius of our system, our separation of powers and the independent judiciary, is that we can never allow that to happen. And there have to be constraints and you mentioned some of them yesterday with regard to what constrains the president.   
      But but still, the president has immense powers. Largely because we have conceded too much from the Article I branch to the Article II branch.   
      But when when we talk about presidential power now, I was struck by a conversation you had yesterday with Senator Feinstein. I wanted to explore it a bit.   
      You mentioned, as a point of pride, and I think it is a point of pride, that you had ruled in the Hamdan case after 9/11 this is one of the bodyguards or drivers for Osama bin Laden it was an extremely unpopular decision, but one to protect his constitutional rights and to ensure that that just didn't look, say, "Here, here's something unpopular. We can't protect his rights."  
      Yet when you were asked why you feel how you do now on the independent counsel statute, it it's you feel differently than you did in the 1990s.   
      And you mentioned to Senator Feingold that you feel differently because of 9/11. And that ostensibly, the president needs to be give more reign, I guess, because he needed to focus on national security issues.   
      And I'm trying to square that. I I think that your explanation of of how you ruled in the Hamdan case is admirable. I'm not sure about your explanation with regard to giving the president more more leash or more authority because of 9/11 squares with that. Can you shed some light?  
KAVANAUGH:  That was simply an a proposal in 2009 when President Obama was coming into office, that for a Congress to consider.   
      But there would be pros and cons if Congress did consider something like that about and it wasn't immunity, it was simply the timing of litigation, the Clinton v. Jones scenario, for example.   
      And it was something an idea based on my experience, but Congress would of course consider the pros and cons. The principle I emphasize there was no one's above the law in the United States Constitution, under the United in the United States government.   
      There is a question and that's Federalist 69, of course, but it's also woven right into the text of the Constitution but there's a question about timing for members of the military for example. That's why we defer have deferral for them.   
      But it was not a constitutional position, so I really want to emphasize that, Senator, that that was not a position of what I thought was required by the Constitution. Rather, something to be studied, as Congress studies things all the time to ensure the effective operation of the government.   
      On your point about Hamdan, I do think some of the and your point about your trip, some of the great moments in Supreme Court history have been those moments of judicial independence in moments of political crisis the Youngstown steel case. We're at war with Korea and the president seizes steel mills. Well well-intentioned because it's well-intentioned to serve the war effort. But the court says it's not consistent with law and therefore unlawful and the court rules against President Truman.   
      We've talked a lot about the United States versus Richard Nixon case, the unanimous decision, 1974, by Chief Justice Burger who had been appointed. The Clinton v. Jones case itself was a moment where the president of the United States was ruled against by the Supreme Court, including two of his appointees.   
      The Boumediene and Hamdan cases in the Supreme Court, before Hamdan came back to me, were cases Boumediene by Justice Kennedy in 2008, ruling against President Bush Boumediene versus Bush in a wartime case.   
      And so, too, my Hamdan case. I do look at that as a case where the rule of law protects all who come into court, regardless of who you are. And no one's above the law and the president is subject to many legal restraints in terms of the official capacity of the war effort. And I think my decisions have shown that independence in in a variety of areas.   
FLAKE:  Thank you. Let me shift gears in my final couple of minutes, to technology. We struggle, here in Congress, with striking a balance, obviously, between security and freedom, between innovation, privacy.   
      We just had the the Facebook hearing in this room, along with the Commerce Committee, and questioned Mark Zuckerberg on these issues.   
      A late-night comic that night commented that, of all of us questioning out here, at least five of us, our our password for our email is "password." And so 
       
      It's yeah. We were not as nimble up here in dealing with a lot of these issues, but the same applies to the court. How does the court, how will the court, how would you as a Supreme Court Justice deal with these issues?   
      Would you describe yourself as technologically literate? I know you've dealt with these issues on the D.C. Circuit. But balancing privacy and innovation, and security, and freedom, this is going to make up a big chunk of what the Supreme Court does over the coming months and years.   
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I do think that technological developments are going to be a huge issue for the Supreme Court over the next generation. And Chief Justice Roberts, has been a writing some of the key opinions, they Carpenter case most recently, which was a very important decision the Riley case before that.   
      And you see how he's and, this would not necessarily have been predicted at the time of his 2005 hearing. How he has focused and led the court in making sure the Fourth Amendment keeps abreast of technological developments and those opinions are very clear and 
FLAKE:  Specifically, what impact does technology have on the Fourth and the First Amendments?  
KAVANAUGH:  So I think the Carpenter case explains that once upon a time, if a piece of information of yours ended up in the hands of a third party and the government got a third party, that really wasn't going to have any effect on your privacy.   
      But now when all of our data is in the hands of a business, a third party, and the government obtains all your data all your e-mails, all your texts, all your information, your financial transactions, your whole life is in the hands of a data company and the government gets that, your privacy is very well affected.  
      And that's the importance, I think, of the Carpenter decision is that it recognizes that change in understanding of our understandings of privacy. And I think going forward, that's going to be a critical a critical issue.   
      One of the cases I did write an opinion in, GPS surveillance and putting a GPS tracker on your car. And I wrote an opinion in the D.C. Circuit where I recognized that putting a GPS tracker on your car was an invasion; a new technology was an invasion of your property. And 

KAVANAUGH:  and, therefore, was something that violated the Fourth Amendment.  

KAVANAUGH:  So and, was something that the Supreme Court then, on an opinion by Justice Scalia, adopted that approach to recognizing the GPS surveillance.   
      But I think going forward, as I've said, these are backward-looking hearings sometimes, with the forward-looking question you asked is, I think, a very important one about the change in Fourth Amendment. Not doctrine, but the change in technology that, in turn, requires us to understand it as we apply Fourth Amendment doctrine going forward.   
      And First Amendment free speech principals as well our conception of speech will have to take account of the technological developments as well.   
FLAKE:  Just one last question, what does an independent judiciary mean in terms of judges and their personal, political or religious beliefs? Have you known good judges who were Democrats, Republicans? Do you see a difference, are they viewed that way? What about Catholic, or a Mormon, or a Muslim or an Atheist? What what should be our approach to judiciary in that sense?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I think, senator, all judges are independent. We don't sit in separate caucus rooms. We don't sit on sides of an aisle. We are not Republican judges or Democratic judges.   
      We are independent United States judges. And so, too, with respect to religious beliefs as I've written we're all equally American, no matter what religion we are or if we have no religion at all.   
      And so, too, as judges, we're all equally United States judges no matter what religion we are. And we see that right in the text of the Constitution that no religious test shall be imposed as a qualification for any office in the United States.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Blumenthal.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  
      Good afternoon, your Honor, and 
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you.  
BLUMENTHAL:  welcome to your team.   
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, senator.  
BLUMENTHAL:  I want to, first of all, tie up a couple of loose ends from yesterday. I asked you yesterday whether, during your service in the Bush administration, you took the position that not all legal scholars believe Roe v. Wade is settled law and whether the Supreme Court could overrule it.   
      You said, in fact, that the Supreme Court could. And you declined to say whether you would commit to saying that you would not vote to overturn Roe v. Wade. I believe, thanks to that exchange, that an e-mail has now been made public in which you took exactly that position. And you argued in that e-mail that Roe can be overturned.   
      My question to you is whether during that break, did anyone suggest to you that I would ask about this e-mail? I think we took a break before I asked you my questions. Did anyone ask you whether did anyone suggest to you that I might ask about this e-mail during the break before the questioning?  
KAVANAUGH:  Just now?  
BLUMENTHAL:  No, yesterday.  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm not remembering I'm not remembering one way or another what did I I'm not remembering.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Did anyone show you this e-mail during the session yesterday at any point?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'd have to check, actually, I don't remember. During each break yesterday? I've had these e-mails, I think.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And you reviewed this one before you came to testify?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm not I'm not going to remember, senator. But I do know that that e-mail does refer to what my impression of what legal scholars think. It's not I think the premise of your question was, respectfully 
BLUMENTHAL:  Well, if you don't if you don't remember somebody whether someone showed it to you or not, I want to move on to another area.   
      You were asked yesterday by Senator Harris, as to whether you had certain conversations about the special counsel investigation with anyone outside of the group of judges on the D.C. Circuit.   
      At that point, your answer was vague and it was again this morning when Senator Hatch asked you about it. So I want to ask you very specifically, have you discussed the special counsel investigation with anyone outside of the group of judges on the D.C. Circuit?  
KAVANAUGH:  I've had no inappropriate discussions with anyone. Of course, it's on the 
BLUMENTHAL:  Have you had any discussions with anyone, appropriate or inappropriate?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well when 
BLUMENTHAL:  Have you ever talked about the special counsel investigation with anyone outside the 
KAVANAUGH:  If you're walking around in America, it's coming up, senator, so people discuss it. But in terms of I've never made any let me just finish if I could. I've never suggested anything about my views about anything, commitments, foreshadowing. I've had no inappropriate discussions.   
      Of course, first of all, let me tell you a few contexts in which it can come up. Our courthouse has a lot of activity going on in it because of that. There are a lot of people there, so those are discussions that will come up. I 
BLUMENTHAL:  Let me be more specific so that we, sort of, hone in on what my concern is. Have you ever talk to anybody in the White House about the special counsel investigation?   
KAVANAUGH:  I've had no discussions with people in the White House about the 
BLUMENTHAL:  No one, including 
KAVANAUGH:  What do you mean I guess I would just want to make sure that I'm understanding what your question is going for. I have had no issues where I've discussed my views on any matters, issues, cases, no hints, previous forecasts. No  
BLUMENTHAL:  But have you ever talked about the special counsel investigation with Don McGahn who is behind you, or anyone else in the White House? That's a simple yes or no.  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm not remembering any discussions like that. Of course in preparing for this hearing, I've prepared for questions like the one you are asking.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And they've 
KAVANAUGH:  So those are moot court sessions where we've 
BLUMENTHAL:  Well, what discussions have you have about the special counsel with people in the White House?  
KAVANAUGH:  I have not had not had discussions if I'm understanding your question correctly, I haven't had such discussions, but I want to make sure I'm understanding your question correctly.   
BLUMENTHAL:  It's pretty simple English. Have you talked about the special counsel with anyone in the White House? Anybody who works for the president of the United States?  
KAVANAUGH:  Right, you just rephrased the question now. That was about Mr. Mueller this and it previously was about the investigation. But I've had if I'm understanding the question correctly, no discussions of the kind you're asking.  
BLUMENTHAL:  So you're saying no, you've had no discussions, you haven't talked to anyone in the White House about Robert Mueller, with the special counsel investigation?  
KAVANAUGH:  So you changed the question again, senator. Of course I know Mr. Mueller personally from my prior experience in the I haven't seen him in a long time, but I knew him when we work together in the the Bush administration. So but I've had no discussions of the kind that I think you're asking about.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Well, I'm asking about the kind you're thinking about, not myself.   
KAVANAUGH:  Well I haven't had any discussions of the kind I'm thinking either.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Well I am going to take that as a no, but you are giving under oath and we can put aside humor for the moment.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right. I'm not trying to be humorous. I'm trying to be accurate and for example, if someone says your courthouse 
BLUMENTHAL:  No, I'm talking about discussions with anybody who works for the president United States in the White House about the special counsel. And so far frankly, your answer has been ambiguous.   
KAVANAUGH:  I don't think it's been ambiguous.  
BLUMENTHAL:  You dodged the question, you ducked it. It's the same question again and again and again, and I'm to move on because I have other ground to cover. You had conversations about the special counsel investigation with anyone at the Kasowitz Benson and Torres firm?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, I don't remember anything like that.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Are you acquainted with anyone at that firm?  
KAVANAUGH:  I know Ed McNally used to work at the White House counsel's office and I now I understand that he works at that law firm.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Have you ever talked to him about the special counsel investigation?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Are you acquainted with Marc Kasowitz?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm not.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Are you acquainted with anyone else at the Kasowitz law firm?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't believe so, but as I discussed Senator Harris last night, I didn't know, for example, Senator Lieberman worked at that firm, and he spoke to the judges a couple years ago before this. But that's the kind of thing I was worried about what I was talking with Senator Harris last night, is that I don't have a full roster. But I'm pretty confident the answer is no.  
BLUMENTHAL:  OK. We've talked about the independence of the judiciary and you have spoken compellingly about the importance of an independent judiciary and I couldn't agree more. I think the heroes of this era will be the independent judiciary in our Free Press. I want talking about President Trump's attacks on the judiciary. They have been blatant, craven and repeated, and I want to quote to you a couple of those attacks.   
      I have sheath a partial quotation of them, 41 tweets attacking the judiciary, but the one I want to cite you is from July 13, 2013, when he said of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, quote, "Justice Ginsburg of the United States Supreme Court has embarrassed all by making very dumb political statements about me. Her mind is shot, resign!"   
      November 10, 2013, again speaking about Justice Ginsburg, "Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was going to apologize to me for misconduct. Big mistake by an incompetent judge." Do you believe that Justice Ginsburg has, quote, "embarrassed us all," end quote?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I of course spoke about all the justices individually during the course this hearing, and might 
BLUMENTHAL:  If I may interrupt, and I say this with all due respect, this is a question where less is more in the answer. Do you think Justice Ginsburg has embarrassed us all?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I'm not going to get drawn into a political controversy. I want to maintain I'm not going to get within three ZIP Codes of a political controversy.   
BLUMENTHAL:  This is not political. This is about Justice Ginsburg. Do you believe that her, quote, "mind is shot," end quote?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, respectfully, you're asking me to, after having read those comments, you're asking me to comment on something another person said and I'm not going to do that. I've I've spoken about my 
BLUMENTHAL:  Do you believe that she's an incompetent judge?  
KAVANAUGH:  I've spoken about my respect and appreciation for the justices on the Supreme Court. My the honor it would be if I were to be confirmed to be part of that team of nine with those eight people, all of whom I know and respect, And I know they're all dedicated public servants who've given a great deal in this country, and so I've I've made that clear throughout this hearing.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Do you believe that a judge should be attacked based on his heritage? The president of the United States attack Judge Gonzalo Curiel, saying that the judge, quote, "the judge who happens to be, we believe, Mexican," and attacking him. Do you believe that judges should be attacked based on their heritage?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, again I'm not going to comment on 
BLUMENTHAL:  Well, these are issues that concern the the independence of the judiciary, your honor. With all due respect, you talked about your heroes, who have the grit and backbone to stand up and speak out. We're talking here about an independent judiciary. My colleagues have raised this point and I might just say to you, as I said to Judge Gorsuch and Judge Gorsuch now Justice Gorsuch, that the judiciary and nominees like yourself have an obligation to stand up for the judiciary. And he said that these attacks are, "disheartening and demoralizing." Do you agree?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I'm not sure the circumstances but the way we stand up is by deciding cases and controversies independently without fear or favor. Beyond that we follow the cannons in the leadership of Chief Justice Roberts who was a superb leader of the American judiciary in terms of maintaining the independence of the judiciary and staying well clear of political 
BLUMENTHAL:  Let me ask you something else then about the intersection of President Trump and yourself. On the night of the announcement of your nomination you were at the White House.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
BLUMENTHAL:  And you chose to begin your speech introducing yourself to the American people by saying and I quote, "No president has ever consulted more widely or talk with more people from more backgrounds to seek input about a Supreme Court nomination." What was the factual basis for that statement?  
KAVANAUGH:  So I did think about that those were my words. Senator Harris asked me about that last night and the president and Mrs. Trump when we were there my family was there the night at the White House. He and Mrs. Trump were very gracious. I was very impressed with, during the 12-day period between Justice Kennedy's announcement of his retirement and the announcement of my nomination, I was impressed as a citizen and as a judge with the thoroughness of the process. And I did look into to your point directly I then thought about and looked into comparing what I knew about past processes and made that comment. And  
BLUMENTHAL:  You looked into past appointments. Did you talk to President Clinton about how many people he talked to before he nominated Justice Ginsburg?  
KAVANAUGH:  So last night I said to Senator Harris that President Clinton I do recall and talked to a lot of people as well and I indicated that's why I use the phrase  
BLUMENTHAL:  He talked to just about everybody in Washington, didn't he?  
KAVANAUGH:  And President Trump talked to a lot of people as well. And so I said to Senator Harris last night I mentioned President Clinton specifically as an indication of someone who likewise consulted very widely as I recall.  
BLUMENTHAL:  But you didn't have any factual basis any record any research at the time of that statement, did you?  
KAVANAUGH:  I did actually look into it as best I could, you know, thinking about the technological developments. I did think about it very carefully. He talked to an enormous number of people, based on my understanding, in those 12 days.  
BLUMENTHAL:  I want to talk to you now about real-world consequences that has impacts in the real world on real people of the decisions that courts make.   
      We were talking yesterday about the statement you that made in Seven Sky versus Holder and I think we have it here. Under the Constitution essentially that statement says to me a president can deem a statute to be unconstitutional even if a court has held or would hold a statute constitutional. Now you stated yesterday to me when we talked at some length that your view was compelled by Heckler versus Chaney and other cases on prosecutorial discretion.   
      I disagree. Nothing in Heckler suggests that the president can essentially nullify simply deem a law unilaterally unconstitutional based on his personal view of the law's constitutionality. So Heckler stands for the principle that courts will generally not second-guess the executive branches decisions on how to use scarce enforcement resources, like I did as a US attorney or as Attorney General of my state of Connecticut.  
      It nowhere says that chief executives are free effectively to nullify duly-passed statutes that have been upheld by the court. But I want to go to the real-world impact. Clearly Heckler doesn't say that there are no limits but for the sake of real-world impacts I think there must be impacts.   
      And one of them affects the Affordable Care Act and the protections it provides to millions of Americans about 13 million Americans including 500,000 in Connecticut who suffer from diabetes or high blood pressure or mental health issues. There are 15 to 20 or more pre-existing conditions and one of them affects a young man. His name is Connor Curran he's eight years old.   
      He suffers from Duchenne muscular dystrophy. And I want you to think about Connor. This is a chronic and terminal condition. It will slowly erode his motor function. Unless we find a cure, eventually, it will take his life. His parents have told me, and I've gotten to know his family pretty well. Although he appears healthy and happy today will slowly lose his ability to run, to walk, even to hug them good night.   
      As Connor gets older he will need more and more help. He will need the Affordable Care Act more and more. He will need protection from abuses that involve pre-existing conditions.  
      My reading of your view of the constitutional authority of Donald Trump is that he could simply deem the Affordable Care Act unconstitutional even if it is upheld by the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals and then by the United States Supreme Court and even though it has been signed by a president who deems it to be constitutional and passed by a Congress who deem it to be constitutional. Do you think the president of the United States has that unilateral authority to nullify protection for Connor? And should the Connor family be afraid?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, thank you for bringing up this example. In my opinions on the Affordable Care Act's in the Sissel case where I upheld the Affordable Care Act against an origination clause challenge and in the Seven Sky case where I made clear that I thought the timing of the case was premature in both those decisions I expressed my respect for the congressional goal in that legislation of ensuring health insurance for uninsured Americans and providing more affordable healthcare for all Americans to take care of people who didn't have health insurance, people who had conditions like the one you're bringing out here.   
      I understand the real world impacts of the Affordable Care Act, I've made that clear in my decisions. I've also -   

KAVANAUGH:  so in - in my decisions on the Affordable Care Act have shown respect for the act and respect for Congress, respect for the law and an understanding of the real world impacts.  
      In terms of prosecutorial discretion, the United States versus Richard Nixon case did say that the executive branch has the exclusive authority and absolute discretion whether to prosecute a case -   
BLUMENTHAL:  We'll I'm - I'm just going to interrupt you, because I'm out of time and if the chairman wants to give you more time, I'm more than happy to hear the rest of your answer. But I just want to express to you my fear and my deep concern that you will not apply the law to the facts, but use the law to advance an ideological position that may affect the people of America like Connor. Thank you.   
GRASSLEY:  Do you - before I go to Senator Crapo, did you say all you wanted to, to the senator?  
KAVANAUGH:  I did.   
GRASSLEY:  I - you don't have to respond to what I'm going to say, but I think that we need some clarification if you want to give it, but only if you want to give it. We've heard it suggested that you did not give clear testimony about the - your - any relationship you might have with - with various people in regard to the Mueller investigation.   
      So have you made any pre-commitments or offered any hints, previews, forecasts, winks, nods or secret handshakes to the president, the vice president, their White House lawyers, anyone else in the administration or anyone at all about if and how you would rule on any matter related to any way to Special Counsel Robert Mueller's current investigation?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, I have not.   
GRASSLEY:  Senator Crapo.   
CRAPO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And before I begin asking questions, I'd like to follow up on that exact line. I have, in - in my hands, the print out of a story that was published two hours ago on CNBC.   
      The headline says "Trump Lawyer Mark Kasowitz Denies Kavanaugh Ever Spoke to Anyone at the Firm About Mueller Probe". It goes on to discuss this in a little more detail, but I would like to ask unanimous consent that this report be put into the record.   
GRASSLEY:  Without objection, so ordered.   
CRAPO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Judge Kavanaugh, before I go to some of my questions in which I'm going to ask you just to describe mostly some of the - the legal parameters in which we worked today with regard to the separation of powers.   
      I wanted to go back to the Independent Counsel versus Special Counsel issue just one more time. You'll recall yesterday in my questioning, I went through the differences between the Independent Counsel and Special Counsel.  
      The reason I'm coming back to it is I've been a little puzzled by my colleagues attacks on your writings about the Morrison case back in - which was talking then about the 1988 case in which the Supreme Court upheld that then old Independent Counsel system.   
      And I've concluded, maybe I'm wrong, but I've concluded that the reason they keep bringing it up and bringing it up and bringing it up is that they may be trying to create some confusion between the old case, the old system, which you were criticizing, which Justice Scalia criticized if I understand correctly, which Senator Durbin criticized and others did, and the current system.   
      And I think - I wonder if maybe they are trying to create an impression in the public that you are criticizing the current system. So I just want to give you one more chance to make it clear, in - in your writings about the Morrison case, were you criticizing the current Special Counsel system?  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Senator. No I was not, and I have tried to make clear to Senator Coons and you and otherwise that I have repeatedly discussed the Special Counsel system, the tradition of that kind of system with approval in the Georgetown Law Journal article that I wrote in the late 1990s as well most recently in the PHH decision where I specifically distinguished that from the Independent Counsel system.   
      The old Independent Counsel system and Morrison which dealt with it has not existed since 1999. The current Special Counsel system I've always spoken approvingly of the general system and the tradition of Special Counsel.   
CRAPO:  Well thank you, and I hope that that puts it to rest. Like I said, for several days now I've been perplexed as to why it is that your criticism of a system that ended in 1999 was such concern.   
      And I hope that any confusion that's been created by those consistent attacks doesn't create and won't create an impression that you are making any comment about our current situation.   
      So thank you for that. What I'd like to do with the rest of the time I had is to go through some issues related to the separation of powers, and I realize that you've been through this, it may seem like endlessly in the last few days.   
      But I want to go back and first start with the notion of deference with regard to rulemaking and the Chevron document. Could you just describe to us what the Chevron doctrine is?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, Senator. What that says, that doctrine, when Congress passes a statute and an administrative agency, executive or independent agency is implementing that statute, the agency's interpretation of that statute will be upheld by a court so long as it's a reasonable interpretation of any ambiguity or gap that may exist in the statute.  
      If the agencies interpret it - interpreting it in a way contrary to its language as interpreted by the tax structure history as reflected in Chevron footnote nine, then it's an impermissible interpretation, but otherwise if it's there's an ambiguity or gap and the interpretation's reasonable, the courts under the Chevron doctrine uphold it.  
CRAPO:  And when you talk about interpreting the statute, you're talking about agency rulemaking?  
KAVANAUGH:  Ordinarily it'll be a - or typically it'll be an agency rulemaking or at least often it'll be an agency rulemaking.   
CRAPO:  And there is an exception, correct, for major cases or what - what is the exception?  
KAVANAUGH:  For rules of major economic or social significance, the Supreme Court has long made clear that the deference to the agencies will not apply in those cases, in those cases we expect Congress, in the words of the Supreme Court most recently in the UARG case, we expect Congress to speak clearly if it wants to assign rulemaking on an issue of major economic or social significance to an agency.   
      And that's a doctrine that Justice Breyer in the 1980s first talked about I believe, actually Justice Rehnquist in the 1980s decision as well talked about and those - that doctrine has been applied by the Supreme Court since the 1990s, most recently in the King versus Burwell and UARG decisions.   
CRAPO:  It seems to me that that's a pretty broad or maybe narrow exception, and what I mean is ill-defined -   

       
CRAPO:  How does a judge  

CRAPO:  How does a judge determine when you have a major circumstance that would be impacted by the exception? Is is there a standard or are there some rules of how a judge makes that determination?   
KAVANAUGH:  There's no clear rule on that. I've talked about that in the U.S. Telecom decision, that the Supreme Court has not as yet provided specific guidance. And you look at the number of people affected, the amount of money involved, the kind of attention it's received in Congress, the kind of attention it's received in the public and you make a judgment based on that whether this is the kind of rule, as Justice Breyer first explained, that's really filling a a smaller the interstices of a statute or is a big social or economic decision.   
      And there are lots of factors you can look into to determine that.   
CRAPO:  Well, it also it seems to me and this is relevant to a number of other comments that you've received in questions that if the congressional statute that is passed is vague or broad, that the room for agency discretion is greater.   
      Does that play an impact or play a role in the determination as to whether it's a major exception that would require a deeper review by the court?   
KAVANAUGH:  Well, the question of ambiguity is something that applies in all of these Chevron cases, but I do think as well in the major rule situation, what Justice Scalia said for the Supreme Court in the UARG case is if it's a rule of major economic or social significance, we expect Congress to speak clearly. And that speak clearly phrase in Justice Scalia's opinion for the court is quite important.   
      In other words, we want to see an express assignment of authority to decide a major social or economic issue, if that's going to be upheld as a rule by the courts.   
CRAPO:  Well, thank you. I appreciate that. This issue is very important to me and to a number of my colleagues because there's a concern among many members of Congress, that Congress has delegated too much of its responsibility to the executive branch by giving them this deference in rulemaking. And the broader and more vague the congressional delegations are, the the greater the opportunity for the executive to simply write law through rulemakings, and so it's a very significant issue.   
      The a further question I have is I know you've also been asked this earlier is there a point at which congressional delegation can be so broad as to be unconstitutional? For example, one of the cases or examples you were given earlier is if Congress just decided to create another group and say we're going to have them be Congress now.   
KAVANAUGH:  So the Supreme Court's long applied the the nondelegation doctrine that allows broad delegations, at least under the precedent, but there is a limit to how broad those delegations can be. And there are there is litigation in the federal courts now and in the Supreme Court now about certain applications of the nondelegation doctrine.   
      But the general law is that the Congress can delegate broadly but there are limits; it has to be an intelligible principle, is the phrase that the Supreme Court has used. Now, what that means in practice has been decided under a series of cases applying that principle over time. Those precedents build on one another and that's what the court applies to figure out whether a delegation has gone too far.   
CRAPO:  And this this brings in the the issue of independent agencies as well, and I know you've talked about that a lot as well. Humphrey's Executor is the case that sets the standard, correct? As to what is an appropriate appropriately constitutionally created independent agency?   
KAVANAUGH:  That that's correct. The 1935 decision in Humphrey's Executor upheld the concept of independent agencies where the heads of the agencies are removable only for cause not at will. And the so we see agencies such as the FERC, the Federal Communications Commission, the SEC and the like.   
CRAPO:  And you have ruled in the PCAOB case that the creation of that independent agency was unconstitutional?  
KAVANAUGH:  That particular independent agency was differently structured than the typical and traditional independent agencies. I dissented in the D.C. Circuit on the in a challenge to the constitutionality of that structure because it was two levels of for-cause removal in essence. The Supreme Court granted review in an opinion by Chief Justice Roberts. They agreed with the approach I had set forth, in essence, in the dissent in the Free Enterprise Fund versus PCAOB case in Chief Justice Roberts' opinion for the court in that case.   
CRAPO:  And and what about the CFPB case? I I understand that you did not rule that the CFPB could be was so unconstitutional that it had to be eliminated but that its structure needed to be changed with regard to the president's authority to replace the director. Could you first of all just describe your reasoning in that case little bit, and then I have one follow up question on that.   
KAVANAUGH:  That decision, in my view, followed from the PCAOB case Chief Justice Roberts had written for the Supreme Court. The CFPB was also structured differently from the traditional independent agency and the Supreme Court, speaking through Chief Justice Roberts, had made clear that independent agencies that were novel, not historically rooted, the structure were problematic constitutionally.   
      And the single director head of an independent agency was something novel not something that had traditionally occurred in independent agencies. So I felt under the precedent set forth by the Supreme Court in the Free Enterprise Fund case that that was a problem. But I did not say that the agency was invalid or could not continue to pursue its important functions regulatory functions for consumer protection.   
      Rather, I said simply that the single director head of it had to be removable at will not for-cause. If and I also made clear, though, if Congress wanted to have a traditional multimember independent agency, Congress could of course change that structure if it wanted.   
      The important point for your question is that the agency would continue to operate. There was another judge who did say that due to that flaw, the whole agency should stop cease operation. I did not agree with that remedy because I did not think that was the proper remedy under the Supreme Court's precedents remedying constitutional problems.   
CRAPO:  Well, that's that's really my follow up question. I'm one of those who has been working since the almost before the creation of the CFPB to establish a board a a balanced board to run the CFPB, which I think would have addressed the constitutional issue that you found.   
      But the question I have is why did you choose the route that kept the agency operative rather than joining with the other judge to say that it had to cease operating until it was fixed?   
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, that's a question of a doctrine known as severability. And that what that doctrine means is suppose you have a law big law and one provision of the law is unconstitutional. What do you do as a court? Do you strike down the entire law or do you hold simply the one provision invalid and excise that provision from the law? And the traditional approach is reflected perhaps in Marbury versus Madison which found a section of the Judiciary Act of 1789 on jurisdiction of the Supreme Court - of the courts to be unconstitutional. And what did the court do in Marbury versus Madison; did it strike down the entire Judiciary Act? No. It excised the one provision that was - or didn't enforce the one provision that was unconstitutional and simply excised that.  
      The traditional approach to severability is ultimately one of Congressional intent to try to figure out what Congress would have wanted in the statute but I have written about this both in cases and in articles that as a general proposition, the proper approach for a court is to try not to disturb more than is necessary of the work Congress has done in setting forth the statute or a scheme and therefore severability as I've referred to it narrows severability is the norm unless Congress has specified a contrary intent or unless the whole law just - unless it just wouldn't work otherwise.  
CRAPO:  All right, I appreciate that explanation, and to go back to agency deference for just a minute. I'd like to talk about the Administrative Procedures Act just to create the full picture. When we were talking about the Chevron doctrine, that's a court-made doctrine, with regard to deference to agency rule making and other interpretation of statutes, the Administrative Procedures Act contains a statutory requirement doesn't it that requires the findings of fact that the agency makes in quasi judicial proceedings to be honored. Have I got that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is with some deference, that's correct.  
CRAPO:  And the reason I bring that up is not so much because it's judicially created issue but because it just shows the broad parameter of deference either through Congress or through judicial precedent has been given to the executive branch in terms of what many of us believe is the equivalent of making law. And just as we don't want you making law, I personally don't want to see the executive branch making law without involvement of Congress to any - to the maximum extent possible.   
      So these are issues that I just hope you will pay attention to in terms of the appropriate establishment and precedent necessary for the kind of separations of powers in our Constitutional system that we need to have as we move forward. I'm not even asking you to comment on that, I'm just making an observation.  
KAVANAUGH:  I will add one comment which I do think it's important when we do review adjudications which is another part of the bread and butter of the D.C. Circuit so agency adjudications where for example it could be a benefits case of some kind or an adjudication of an NRB case that when we review those adjudications, I do think it's important that courts be aware of the importance of those cases for the individuals affected by those cases and to make sure that the adjudications are complying with the principles of American justice and due process that we expect in an adjudication when someone's life, liberty, or property is on the line.   
      And administrative adjudication is something I've written about in many of my cases to make sure that the proper kind of fact finding is occurring even in the administrative adjudications.  
CRAPO:  Well thank you. I appreciate you making that note and I actually have pages of summaries of your adjudications on those kinds of issues and I will just make a conclusory statement there for the argument that you're not watching out for the little guy or you're not making that the litigants in their engagement with executive agencies are protected. People just have to read the cases. I commend you for being very, very carefully attentive to making sure that the rights of individuals in agency adjudications are protected and honored.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you Senator.  
CRAPO:  The last thing I'll do with my two minutes is I want to talk to you about Western States issues. Senator Flake got into this a little bit yesterday and I actually was surprised to hear him say - I think he said 83 or 85 percent of Arizona was owned by the federal government. I'm impressed, I'm sorry for him, but in Idaho it's 63 percent of the state is federal land. We believe that you know we've got the bragging rights to gorgeous country, whether it's mountains, rivers, deserts, fishing, hunting, recreation of all different kinds. The environment that we have in Idaho is a wonderful place. That's one of the reasons people go there to live.   
      We are also very concerned about the management of that federal land. We want to make sure that at the same time we protect and preserve this heritage we also allow the people who live there to be able to have a - an ability to make a life and to make a living. And there's a conflict there. I don't believe it's an irreparable conflict, in fact I believe where both a strong economy and a strong environment can be achieved. I'm not asking you to make any commitments about anything except I would like you to just acknowledge to me as you did to Senator Flake that you understand we've got some incredibly different types of issues in the West that relate to the differences in land ownership.  
KAVANAUGH:  Absolutely Senator, I understand that and I've tried through my decisions, like the Otay Messa Case, cases like the Carpenter's Case to understand the situation with the West, the land, the designations of land. It's not my job, of course, as a judge to make the policy decisions for those land or environmental regulations but it is my job to police the boundaries of what you have set forth in the statutes and to make sure the executive is not unilaterally rewriting the law or going beyond what's been authorized by Congress.   
      It's also my job when constitutional boundaries are crossed in terms of action taken by the government with respect to land or landowners to make sure that I'm enforcing the Constitution. I understand and hope my opinions demonstrate my understand and appreciation for the importance of land and landowners in the Western states and throughout the entire United States for that matter but I know how important it is to you and Senator Flake as well.  
CRAPO:  Thank you very much.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you Senator.  
HIRONO:  Thank you Mr. Chairman. The Chairman asked and you responded that you had not engaged in any secret handshakes, winks, an no discussions relating to the Mueller investigation. On the other hand, your "Minnesota Law Review" article wherein you say Congress should protect a sitting president from criminal or civil proceedings is a pretty big signal or notice to this president and as far as I can see it is a very big blinking red light.   
      I was also listening to the series of questions ask of you by Senator Blumenthal regarding the comments made by the president referencing judges. Is disagreeing with the president a concern to you?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm an independent judge. I have ruled in cases such as the  case where that was a signature prosecution of the Bush 
HIRONO:  So you're saying that disagreeing with the president is not a concern to you. Is that what your response is?  
KAVANAUGH:  I am saying that as a judge deciding cases or controversies, I decide cases based on who has the better position. I've done that for 12 years, and I have a record to show that, 307 opinions in 
       
HIRONO:  Is 
KAVANAUGH:  over 2,000 cases.   
HIRONO:  Is disagreeing with the president a concern to you when it's not a case in front of you?   
KAVANAUGH:  Following the lead of the judicial canons, following the lead of Chief Justice Roberts, who leads the federal judiciary. We stay out of politics. We don't comment on politics, we don't comment on comments made by politicians. We stay out, way away from politics.   
HIRONO:  So to the extent that a comment is made by the president, then, disagreeing with him, any statement that the president makes is political to you and you will not respond. Thank you.   
      Let me follow up with some questions that some of us had of you yesterday. And we last night.   
      Yesterday evening, Senator Tillis asked you about Rice v. Cayetano. And that's the case that I discussed, where the issue was whether the state of Hawaii could restrict those voting for offices of the officers of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs, which administer certain lands held in trust for native Hawaiians to only native Hawaiians.   
      In fact, Hawaii felt so strongly about the importance of its trust obligations to the native Hawaiian community, the people of Hawaii the people of Hawaii voted to create the Office of Hawaiian Affairs also known as OHA in our constitution. It's not just the law, it is in our constitution that we created the Office of Hawaiian Affairs in 1978.   
      In answering Senator Tillis, you described the case Rice v. Cayetano giving it a different and grossly misleading spin. What you said totally ignored and disparaged the trust obligation that the state had to native Hawaiians.   
      And this trust obligation led the state to create the Office of Hawaiian Affairs, and to decide who should be able to vote for the leaders of that office, native Hawaiians.   
      You said the state, quote, "denied voting to people who were residents and citizens of Hawaii but were not of the correct correct race." And therefore, African-Americans and Latinos and Asian-Americans and Whites were barred from voting for that office.   
      You then misstated the holding of Rice v. Cayetano. You said, quote, "The Supreme Court held that that was a straightforward violation of the 14th and 15th Amendments of the U.S. Constitution."  
      I'll get to your misstatement later. But my first question to you is:  Do you think that Rice can be used to justify the argument that programs to benefit native Hawaiians are subject to strict scrutiny and of questionable validity under the Constitution, as you noted in the e-mail that I referred to last night.   
KAVANAUGH:  I appreciate the question, Senator, and thank you for raising it. In Rice v. Cayetano, Justice Kennedy wrote the opinion for the 7-2 Supreme Court, saying that the voting restriction in that case violated the Constitution.   
      To your question about I'm getting to your question about the other question, that was something I wrote in an e-mail then. And if if that issue came before me, I would there's been subsequent precedent that would be relevant. I and I would have an open mind about how to apply the precedents of the Supreme Court, the strict scrutiny or intermediate scrutiny that would apply in a case like that, and would consider 
       
KAVANAUGH:  the facts and circumstances in argument.   
HIRONO:  Rice is the 15th Amendment case. It was a state action case. So should another state action voting case come to you, you would apply Rice.  
      My question was whether you would turn to Rice for the proposition that programs that benefit native Hawaiians should be subject to strict scrutiny because they are of questionable validity under the Constitution 
KAVANAUGH:  Right. So 
HIRONO:  that is my question.   
KAVANAUGH:  Yeah, so I appreciate that, Senator, and I think that would be analyzed in the in the light of Rice, but in the light of all the other precedents of the Supreme Court on programs that so contracting programs and higher education programs, which has set forth a body of precedent under which programs like that would be analyzed.   
      And I would look at the specific program under the facts and arguments of that case 
HIRONO:  So considering that Rice was a 15th Amendment case and you're citing to other examples where other constitutional provisions may come into play, Rice should be limited to a 15th Amendment case because that is what the court decided.   
      But in fact, you answered last night that the case was decided under the 14th and 15th you said it was a straightforward violation of 14th and 15th Amendments of the U.S. Constitution.  
      So that is not what the court did, as I've iterated, and I think you agree. Because, I mean, that's that's what you wanted the decision to be based on. You wanted the Rice decision to be based on the 14th and 15th Amendments.   
      So that is not what they did. So this reminds me of the criticism that was lodged against you in the U.S. v. Anthem case, where the majority said that you applied the law as you wanted it to be, not what it is.   
      My question to you is:  Where in the Rice court's opinion did the court decide the case on 14th Amendment grounds?   
KAVANAUGH:  The principle of the 15th Amendment is that there can't be voting restrictions on the basis 
HIRONO:  I'm asking you where in the decision does the court rely on the 14th Amendment? And you're you're citing to the 15th Amendment. It's 14th  
       
KAVANAUGH:  I I think the the 14th and 15th Amendments, I think, both prohibit restrictions on voting on the basis of race. The 15th Amendment explicitly. This refers to voting. But the 14th Amendment, of course, applies, as I read the precedent, to all state restrictions on the basis of race.   
HIRONO:  Well, the 14th Amendment mainly relies on "one man, one vote." That's a whole another line of cases. But that is not what the court chose to decide, base its decision on Rice.   
      So I would expect someone who's going to be on the Supreme Court to be very, very careful in citing precedent, and to be very accurate in in saying what the court based its decision on.   
      And it is totally clear to me, because you have not been able to cite to the opinion in Rice that says, "We are deciding this case based on the 14th Amendment." They did not.   
      So that is very disturbing to me, that you would cite that case for the proposition that it was based on the 14th Amendment, when clearly it was not. And you have been, as I noted, been criticized for citing law as you wished it to be and not as it is. Let me go on to Priests for Life case. The free exercise clause of the 1st Amendment ensures that each person has the freedom of conscience to pursue their own religious values. These rights end where they would interfere with another's ability to do the same.   
      However, in recent years, a wide range of individuals and institutions have received special dispensation to impose their beliefs on others.   
      And of course, most notably, this is the Hobby Lobby v. Burwell case. So a case that raised those kinds of issues came before you in the Priests for Life.   
      And in that case, one of the things you had to determine was whether there was a substantial burden on the employers. And their employers, their claim, the act of filling out a form to let their insurance company and health and human services know that they had a religious objection, weren't going to cover the contraception, was overly burdensome. And it wasn't the priests who providing the contraception coverage, a third-party was, and the priests weren't focused - foreseeing that third-party to cover birth control, Congress was, through the ACE.   
      In your dissent, you thought that was too much. You said the employer's religious exercise was substantially burdensome and that they could deny contraceptive coverage to their employees.   
      So my question to you is, do you believe that the freedom of religion cause - supersedes other rights?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, Senator, I made on that decision, that the Religious Freedom Restoration Act has a third-part test. For a substantial burden, I found that satisfied there based on the Hobby Lobby precedent which I was bound to follow, in the Wheaton College.  
      Second, compelling interests - I did found a compelling interest there for the government, in ensuring access. And then the third prong is least restrictive means, and I made clear there, I cited - we have a seagulls law review article, it makes clear  
HIRONO:  Let me get to the first problem which is - whether this was unduly burdensome. So you determined that filling out a two-page from was unduly burdensome, did you not?  
KAVANAUGH:  I concluded that penalizing someone thousands and thousands of dollars for failing to fill a form, when they didn't fill it out because of their religious beliefs, was  
HIRONO:  No, if they filled out a two-page form, they could have been totally insulated from thousands and thousands of fines. So the question became, not the fines, that was irrelevant, the question was whether a two-page form was overly burdensome, and you determined it was overly burdensome.  
      You know, it kind of defies logic to me. Let me go on to what I would consider to be a related case, which is Garza v. Hargan. And I would consider these two cases as being related, because, first of all, they are both cases about women's reproductive freedom.   
      And second, while you balance the interest of the parties involved in very different ways, you come to different conclusions, what's similar is, in both cases, you ruled against the women. In Garza v. Hargan, been brought out before you, argued that the government's, basically, charade of trying to keep a young women in custody until it was too late to get an abortion was not an undue burden on her rights.  
      So forcing her to remain in HHH's custody, and in fact, considering this to be a parental consent case, which was not the case, it's - that was irrelevant, and  you're insistent, that a government requirement that religious employers filled a pretty short form, declaring their objection to providing health care was "too much of a burden." And in each case, you reached your desired outcome, which is against women's reproductive rights. And you ignore the common sense meaning of "burden."   
      By the way, filling out the two page form, the majority opinion did not consider that overly burdensome, and you know, I really think that your conclusions, that filling out this form is overly burdensome, defied logic.   
      But it is logical in the sense that, in both cases, you were against women's reproductive rights. So how is it possible for me to draw any other conclusions that, basically, you really want to limit a woman's reproductive rights?   
      So even though you have engaged in a balancing test, in the case of Priests for Life, filling out a two-page form was "too much," but in the case of Garza, it was not too much to have this young women remain in custody and to be forced, as for your concern, to wait around for foster parents to be found?  
KAVANAUGH:  In each case, Senator, I was doing my best to apply the precedent on point. The Hobby Lobby and Wheaton College case - the Wheaton College case had dealt with a form, and so, I followed, as best I could, the Wheaton College case.  
      The Supreme Court had, I think, a six to three vote, found - or granted emergency injunction. In that case, I tried my best to follow that precedent.   
HIRONO:  See that's the thing about following precedent, because, you know, often times, your own perspective, a judge's ideological viewpoints come into play. As to which precedent to apply, how to apply the precedent, and what parts of the precedent do you want to apply.   
      Let me get to something that should be really simple. I think you said yesterday, that Korematsu had been overruled. And in Trump v. Hawaii, the chief justice wrote, "Korematsu was gravely wronged. The day was decided, it has been overruled in the court of history, and to be clear, has no place in the law under the constitution.".  
      I'm just really curious, is being overruled by the court of history a valid way to overrule a case?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think what the - what he chief justice was recognizing in that case was the same thing that the Supreme Court, Justice Brannan had recognized in the New York Times versus Sullivan, where he said the Sedition Act of 1798 had been overruled in the court on history.  
      In other words, so it wasn't a specific case that arose, but it was important for the Supreme Court to, nonetheless, recognize that this law, in the case of the Sedition Act, in this precedent, in the case of Korematsu, was no longer good law and due to note that. And so the chief justice noted that in the Trump versus  
HIRONO:  This was, by the way, longer after Korematsu's case was brought, many, many years later, wherein it was made very clear that Korematsu had been wrongly decided. It would be nice if the court of history can overrule cases, but let me go on to Trump v. Hawaii.   
      The chief justice declared that Korematsu has nothing to do with this case, but Justice Sotomayor called the, quote - I'm quoting here - "All the more troubling, giving this dark parallels between the reasoning of this case and that of Korematsu v. United States." And she continued, quote, "In Korematsu, the court gave a pass to  racial classification authored by an executive order, and basically the court invoked an ill-defined national security threat to justify an exclusionary policy in sweeping proportion."   
      Now aren't the parallels between the cases very strong, because in Trump v. Hawaii, as it was in Korematsu, the president discriminated against a minority group of national security grounds, and in both cases, the court didn't question an, obviously, bogus justification. They did not, in both cases, go behind the bald-face assertion by the president, that this was based on national security.   
      So where does this reasoning take us, because if they president can claim national security as a shield against any challenge to his actions, under what circumstances do you think a court based on the most recent case, Trump v. Hawaii, should a court look behind the president's stated justification of national security?  
KAVANAUGH:  The Supreme Court's made clear, Senator, in a variety of cases that it will hold the executive branch to account, in national security cases, the Boumediene case in 2008, the Youngstown case in 1952, the Hamdi case. So the national security is not a blank check for the president, the Supreme Court has said, Justice O'Conner writing in the Hamdi case.  
      And that's an important principle under our Constitution, is that, even in a context of wartime, the courts are not silent civil liberties are not silent. In the particular case you're raising, Chief Justice Roberts concluded that there was no violation in that case.   
      But the general principle that I think is important to reiterate is that we're a nation of laws, including in the national security context, and that the precedent of the Supreme Court over the course of our history has recognized that the law applies even in wartime and national security.   
HIRONO:  Well, the thing is though the most recent iteration of an articulation of national security to justify an executive order is Trump v. Hawaii. The record was replete with references and statements that the president had made as to what his true intentions were that this was a Muslim ban, he talked about it during the campaign, he talked about it after the campaign 
       

HIRONO:  he told the Justice Department 

HIRONO:  he told the Justice Department as president, get me a iteration of this ban that would withstand constitutional challenge. And so the most recent iteration is very concerning because it says to me that the president can say, this is based on national security and the Supreme Court made very plain that it would not look behind that articulation.   
      Let me move on. Running out of time, so the Warren Court. In 2017 you gave a tribute to the late Chief Justice William Rehnquist. You explained that you chose the topic because it pains me you that many young lawyers and law students, even Federalist Society-types have little or no sense of the jurisprudence and importance of William Rehnquist to modern constitutional law.   
      And then they you went on they do not know about his role in turning the Supreme Court away from its 1960s Warren Court approach where the court in some cases has seemed to be simply enshrining its policy views in to the Constitution, or so the critics charged. And then you praised Chief Justice Rehnquist because he righted the ship of constitutional jurisdiction.   
      What decisions of the Warren Court were you referring to as simply enshrining its policy views in to the Constitution? Were you thinking about Brown? Were you think about Loving? Were you thinking about any of the Warren Court decisions that created rights for individuals? Privacy rights?   
      There's a whole array, so which were the Warren Court decisions that you thought needed to be righted by the Rehnquist court?  
KAVANAUGH:  I and I said, or so the critics charged. I identified the areas where Chief Justice Rehnquist had helped the court, I think, reach consensus or maybe a middle ground on areas such as criminal procedure, that is religion clause cases, and identified all those in the speeches. When he when he passed away, and even before he passed away many of the justices who worked with him were very much praiseworthy of Chief Justice Rehnquist for fiercely defending the independence of the judiciary 
HIRONO:  I'd really be interested to know the particular cases that you're referring to not general kinds of cases particular cases.  
KAVANAUGH:  I think I referred to them in the speech, but thank you, Senator.   
GRASSLEY:  After Senator Kennedy asks his questions we'll take a 30-minute dinner break. I expect we'll be back around 6:15 then, and four senators will be able to ask questions Booker, Tillis, Harris, Cornyn and then several members have requested a third round. After all questions are finished we'll then move to Dirksen 226 for the closed session.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I just wanted to say one thing, Mr. Chairman, when I introduced the players earlier, I did not see the three in the second row Mary-Grace, Shae, and Kiki are in the second row. They are all three eighth graders and Megan.  

       

GRASSLEY:  They are 
KAVANAUGH:  They're getting an introduction to democracy, Mr. Chairman.   
       
GRASSLEY:  Yeah.  
KAVANAUGH:  So it is noisy and I will explain that to them later.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Kennedy?  
KENNEDY:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, ladies. You'll get used to the yelling. It's happened over Senator Tillis is keeping count it's happened over 200 times in the last 3 days. It's not really how democracy is supposed to work.   
      Judge, I I will repeat what I said yesterday. I I'm not going to ask you to give me any hint about how you might vote on the court if you're confirmed. Certainly don't want you to violate the Judicial canons of ethics and I I may have to gently interrupt you a few times to kind of move you along or move me along.   
      Yesterday you started to talk about Justice Harlan and his feeling about whether he should vote in a political election and somehow we ran out of time, and I thought I'd give you an opportunity to finish that thought?  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Senator. And one of the things that we have to do as judges, as I've emphasized many times in this hearing, is maintain the independence of the Federal Judiciary independence from politics, in independence from political influence or public pressure, or public influence. And part of that, part of the canons for federal judges, Federal Judiciary is that we don't attend political rallies, we don't we're not allowed to donate to political campaigns, support political candidates, put bumper stickers on our cars, signs in our yards.   
      And one of the things I decided we we are allowed technically to vote but one of the things I decided after I voted in the first election and I read something about how the second Justice Harlan had decided not to vote in elections because he thought that reinforced the independence that he felt as a judge. And I thought about that and I decided to follow that lead.   
      I'm not saying my approach is right and other judges take a different approach on that, and I fully respect that but for me it just felt more consistent for me with the independence of the Judiciary, not to not to vote because I have always considered voting a sacred responsibility, and one in which I think very deeply about the policies I'm supporting, and the people I'm supporting and that seemed almost as if I were taking policy views, at least to myself, into the voting booth, and I didn't want to do that as a judge.   
      So I decided to follow the lead of the second Justice Harlan; I'll be the first to say I'm not the second Justice Harlan. He was a great Justice on the Supreme Court, and someone of course who I would be if I were to be a confirmed honored to be on that court and follow in his lead.  
KENNEDY:  So, you don't you don't vote in political elections?  
KAVANAUGH:  I do not vote in political elections.   
KENNEDY:  Interesting.   
      Last night you talked a little bit about your outreach efforts to attract more women and minority law clerks could you quickly go through that for me again? I think I was getting coffee when you were talking about that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, one of the issues in American society generally of course, but also in the judiciary in particular has been to advance to overcome the discriminatory history of the of the country, and to help advance the cause of women and minorities in the legal profession.   
      And one of the of the areas where that's revealed itself is law clerk hiring. And one of the and that's important because the law can be  
KENNEDY:  Law clerks for judges?   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, we law clerks for judges. We get we get four law clerks each year, and they're there for just 1 year and then they turn over after a year. They're like a team. They turn over after the year and you get a new team of four the next year. Those law clerks are among the best and brightest out of American law schools, and they often will go on to leadership positions in the in the Congress or in the state legislatures or in the judiciary or in the Bar or in public service.   
      And so those are important training positions for the future leaders of America. And there has been there was disparities when I came on the bench in the number of women and minorities. So I decided to be very proactive about that. There was a problem identified, I decided to be proactive.   
      So on the women law clerk front, I'm very proud that of my 48 law clerks, a majority of them have been women, and they are the best and brightest and one of them was just confirmed as a federal judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, Britt Grant, and and she was in my second class of clerks.   
      That's important, because as my mom as I talked about my mom, my mom was a trailblazer in the law and overcame barriers to help women achieve equality in the law, and I wanted to do my part as well. And not just because of her, I would but she was an example to help achieve equality for all women to give them an equal place at the table and future opportunities, and I think I've I've helped one small I'm just one small piece, so I don't want to overdo it, but I've tried to be proactive about it and to make a difference.   
      So to  
KENNEDY:  What about minority outreach?   
KAVANAUGH:  Right, so in 2009 or 2010 so after I was on the court for about 3 years, there was a hearing I think in the House Appropriations Committee with the two justices usually go up every year and talk about the Supreme Court budget and testify before the Appropriations Committee to get money to explain the need for money for the Supreme Court for the following year.   
      And Justice Thomas and Justice Breyer were there that year, and they were asked about the seeming disparity with minority law clerks in general, African American law clerks in particular, and one of the things they said and they were talking about Supreme Court law clerks, those are the law clerks for the Supreme Court Justices and one of the things they said was they hired from the lower courts, from the courts of appeals.   
      And they pointed out that the pool in the courts of appeals was had the disparities, and so they were really dependent on what the court of appeals did and and does.   
      I took that as a bit of a call to action to do something about it myself.   
KENNEDY:  And what did you do, Judge?   
KAVANAUGH:  I I I reached out initially to the Black Law Students' Association at Yale Law School, emailed them and asked them if I could come talk to them. Yale Law School's a school that produces a lot of law clerks, so I thought and it's my Alma Mater.   
KENNEDY:  Fair enough.   
KAVANAUGH:  I start there, and I went and spoke to them. What I did is I went and spoke to the group and I explained to them the importance of clerking, I encouraged them to clerk, I explained the history of the disparities. Then I gave them, in essence, what I thought were were tips about how to make yourself a better clerk. Kind of like a coach, tips to how to be a better clerk candidate, classes to take, professors how to deal with professors  
KENNEDY:  And you you think that helped?   
KAVANAUGH:  I do think it helped. I I was uncertain, frankly  
KENNEDY:  Sure.   
KAVANAUGH: when I walked into the room how that would work, and it worked great in terms of the reaction I got, and also in terms of I think the real world results. And the way I thought about it is if I make even a a difference for one clerk or one student, it's it's worth it.   
KENNEDY:  Sure.   
KAVANAUGH:  And I think I did for more, and I've kept it up year after year. I've done it also where I teach at Harvard Law School, and I'm proud of the the results. I think I think it's made you know, again, a small difference, but it's one person at a time, one clerk at a time, one student at a time.   
      And I think hopefully by talking about it in this forum, I can encourage more efforts of that nature, which are really just recruiting efforts and explanation for many of the students at law schools are first generation professionals and don't have the networks necessarily that others do, and so  
KENNEDY:  I I know we could we could I can tell you enjoy talking about   
        
KAVANAUGH:  I could go for about two hours on that, but yes, Senator, I thank you for cutting me off.   
KENNEDY:  And I'll be glad to go if the chairman will give me two hours  
        
     but I don't think he will. Have I know you've read an opinion before where you you agree with the conclusion but but you don't agree with the reasoning. Have you had that experience?   
KAVANAUGH:  I I have.   
KENNEDY:  Yes. I think we all have.   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.   
KENNEDY:  Here's why I asked that. Can you tell me what in God's name a penumbra is?   
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the the Supreme Court, as I think you're referring to, once used that term, but it it doesn't use that term anymore for figuring out what otherwise unenumerated rights are protected by the Constitution of the United States. What it refers to now is a test in the Glucksberg case and Justice Kagan talked about this in her confirmation hearing when she was sitting in this seat the Glucksberg case sets forth a test where unenumerated rights will be recognized if they're rooted in history and tradition.   
      And why that matters, I think to your point  
KENNEDY:  Can I stop you? It's deeply rooted.   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.   
KENNEDY:  And is that is that are those roots that are that are just deep? Are those roots that are deep that have been growing there a long time? Do you understand what I'm asking? Is it  
KAVANAUGH:  I fear I don't.   
        
KENNEDY:  Well, I I that's that's my fault, not yours. Is it a is it is it something that Americans have cherished for a long time, or can it be something that is a is a is a more of contemporary society?   
KAVANAUGH:  So when the court has referred to deeply rooted in history and tradition, it is it has looked to history. Now, how deep the history must be is there I don't think there's a one-size-fits-all answer to that, and how much contemporary practice matters, I also don't think there's a one-size-fits-all, but the important thing is the court and again, Justice Kagan emphasized this in her hearing, that the Glucksberg test means that the court is not simply doing what your role is, which is to figure out the best policy and to enshrine it into the law, in the Constitution, in the case of the court, but rather is looking for, as best it can, objective indicia of rights that are not explicitly enumerated in the Constitution but that are nonetheless protected.   
      The best example I think is the Pierce case. Oregon passed a law saying that everyone and this is in the 1920s saying that everyone in the state of Oregon, every student had to attend a public school and could not attend a parochial or private school. And parents who wanted to send their child to a Catholic or child to a Catholic school sued and argued that that violated the United States Constitution. It made it to the Supreme Court. The right in essence, the claimed right was the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children by sending them to a private or parochial school.   
      And the Supreme Court affirmed and recognized that right under the United States constitution even though that's   
KENNEDY:  What what is and that is a good example, Judge. And again, I apologize for interrupting but we're we're dealing here with values, are we not? That we all cherish together as Americans? Like the rule of law or privacy or equal opportunity or personal responsibility. How do you determine what values all Americans cherish?   
      How do nine people determine what values all Americans cherish enough to read into or to discover as a result of the superior intellect of those nine individuals is a part of the constitution? And has been there for a long time. But most of us couldn't see it except the nine justices.   
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I I don't think that's the conception of the judicial role that the Supreme Court has articulated   
KENNEDY:  I agree, but that's the perception some people have and perception is important in in in appreciation of government.   
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I agree with you that the the values question is one that of course is first and foremost for Congress to figure out the policy or the state legislatures. Judges, federal judges, the Supreme Court were not supposed to be, I think consistent with your question, simply importing our own values into the constitution. It's not just supposed to be five people.   
      We're we're five people like every other American. We don't have a charter to create new rights just because we think they're best, rather we find them   
KENNEDY:  Excuse me again for interrupting, but I think Justice Scalia would say and has said that no disrespect, but that that five people, whomever they may be, on the United States Supreme Court can establish this value and and and that their sense of morality or their value system is no better or worse than picking out picking out the first five names in the Washington, D.C. phone book.   
KAVANAUGH:  He did say that and I think that is a comment that I think is shared by the justices on the Supreme Court and is reflected now in the in the Glucksberg test. But I recognize that there it's important to explain that to people so that people don't get confused about our role. Our role is rooted in law, it's rooted in precedent, it's rooted in not our values per se but the values reflected either in the constitution or reflected in the legislation passed by Congress.   
      And I realize the gray areas in what I'm just saying, but it's very important to to explain that to people.   
KENNEDY:  And and and here's my point. Excuse me again for interrupting. I will bet most Americans could agree today and would agree that that we have a privacy right. We have search and seizure, privacy is important, but we also believe now that disclosural privacy is important, autonomy privacy is important. And it's part of our constitution. And frankly, I'm glad that it is. But how it got there matters. How it got there matters.   
      It's not just the end result. Let me leave that for a second   
KAVANAUGH:  I agree with that.   
KENNEDY:  and and just kind of shift gears. I've just got a few minutes left. I can tell from your testimony the last three days or two days that high school was those were formative years for you. You went to Georgetown Preparatory School?   
KAVANAUGH:  I did, Georgetown Prep, a Jesuit high school here. It was very formative.   
KENNEDY:  What was it like for you? What were you like? Were you did you ever get in trouble? Did you were you more of a John-Boy Walton type or a Ferris Bueller type?   
        
KENNEDY:  These ladies are old enough to understand.   
KAVANAUGH:  I loved sports, first and foremost. I think that I I worked hard at school. I had a lot of friends. I've talked about my friends. They've been here. So it was it was very formative. And when I think back on it   
KENNEDY:  You left out the trouble part. I was waiting for that.   
KAVANAUGH:  Right. So that's encompassed under the friends, I think.   
KENNEDY:  You were an athlete?   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, I played football and basketball. My coach my football coach was named Jim Fagan and he's a legendary football coach. And so over the last eight weeks, where I've been in a slightly different situation than I'd been in for the previous 53 years, I in terms of where I can go freely, I've been working out on weekends at my old high school and running on the track and ran into him out there. It was awesome to run into him.   
      He still helps out with the football team and he sent me a text three nights ago. So it's awesome.   
KENNEDY:  OK. That's all I'm going to get out of you, I understand. All right. Let me yield back. Strike that, Mr. Chairman, I'm just just in case this we have to have the time, I'm going to reserve my two hours and ten minutes. I was or I'm sorry, my two two two minutes and seven seconds.   
        
KENNEDY:  Now, see I was going to ask the judge if not him but any of his underage running buddies had ever tried to sneak a few beers past Jesus or something like that in high school but I'm not going to go there.   
     
        
CORNYN:  Well I for one am grateful for the senator's restraint self-restraint. Judge, your endurance has been remarkable. Those of us on the dais who have been able to come and go and attend to business along the way. You've had to sit there for two full days and you're not through yet. But you're getting close. I think you said you've run a couple marathons. Consider this about the 20 mile mark where you hit the wall.   
KAVANAUGH:  Yes. Yes.   
CORNYN:  But but we're getting getting closer. I just want to say briefly that your conversation with Senator Kennedy about your recruiting female law clerks and the importance of being pro active there reminds me of a conversation I had briefly before you and I met when I served on a state appeals court, the Texas Supreme Court, where I would also hire law clerks and most often they would be female law clerks and I would ask them occasionally, I'd say well why do you think it is that I end up hiring predominantly female law clerks.  
      She said it's easy your honor. We're smarter and we work harder. So with that, we're going to take a 30 minute break. We'll be back about 6:15 and then Senator Booker, Senator Tillis, Senator Harris, and I will ask questions before we go to the third round.  
