
GRASSLEY:  Before I introduce the panel, I if nobody told you that you push the red button before you speak, otherwise we won't be able to hear you.   
      So the next panel is followed by eight witnesses; four are for the majority and four are selected by the minority. We have a Mr. Kramer, a Ms. Eastmond, Ms. Taibleson, Mr. Corbin, Mr. LaChance, Ms. Mahoney, Ms. Smith and Mr. Christmas.   
      I would ask you at this point if you would stand and I'd like to have you take an oath. Do you swear that the testimony you're about to give before this committee will the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God?  
       
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, all, very much for responding.   
      Now, I would like to intro say a little bit about each of you so the public watching on television or anybody in the audience knows. Aalayah Eastmond is a let's see, I'm I'm going yeah, OK. Is a student oh, you know why I'm I I should be starting with Mr. Kramer.   
      A.J. Kramer is Federal Public Defender for the District of Columbia; very important position. He's held the position since the creation of the Office of Federal Public Defender for the District of Columbia in 1991. Now, I don't know but I'll bet you'd be one of the longest serving people in that position any place in the country.   
      We have Aalayah Eastmond, a student from Parkland, Florida and a survivor of the very bad school shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. Quite a tragedy you went through and we'll hear about it I'm sure.   
      Rebecca Taibleson served as law clerk for Judge Kavanaugh from 2010 to 2011, later clerk for Justice Scalia on the Supreme Court and was an associate of Kirkland & Ellis. She currently serves as federal prosecutor in our Iowa's neighboring state of Wisconsin.  
      Jackson Corbin is a student from Hanover, Pennsylvania. And that's all the information I have about you, but if you want to tell us any more about you, we won't take it off of your time that you have to speak to us.   
      Then we have Hunter LaChance, a student from Kennebunk, Maine.   
      And then we have Maureen Mahoney serving as Deputy Solicitor General of the United States from 1991 to 1993. She is a retired partner of Latham & Watkins.  
      Melissa Smith is a teacher at U.S. Grant High School, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.   
      Kenneth Christmas is executive vice president for business and legal affairs, Marvista Entertainment. He is a 1991 graduate of Yale Law school and you were a classmate of Judge Kavanaugh.   
      So I welcome all of you and I think we'll proceed with Mr. Kramer and then we'll have our questioning.  
KRAMER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Senator Whitehouse. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today on behalf of Judge Brett Kavanaugh's nomination to be a justice of the Supreme Court.   
      I have been, as Chairman Grassley said, the Federal Public Defender in Washington D.C. since 1990. Prior to that and I think all you meant was that I'm old when you said I'm one of the longest and there I have worked in the federal public defender's offices in Sacramento and San Francisco before I came to Washington D.C., so I've spent my entire legal career as a federal public defender.   
      I do want to echo two things that were said by the prior panel that I too was dismayed that Chief Judge Garland was not confirmed for the Supreme Court because I think he would've been a great Supreme Court justice, and also Congressman Richmond's remarks about race in the criminal justice system, which I think still pervades the criminal justice system.  
      And I do so I suppose you ask what I'm doing here speaking on behalf of Judge Kavanaugh and I will tell you why. I have two disclaimers I have to make. I speak only on my own behalf not on behalf of our office here in Washington D.C. or any other federal public defender office or the federal public defender system. And also I have read essentially none of Judge Kavanaugh's civil opinions, but I have read almost all of his criminal opinions and I have argued in front of him numerous times probably more than 20 times in criminal cases. And that's what I'm here to talk about his decisions in criminal cases. And I have to just say say that he is extremely well prepared in oral argument. He asks the pertinent questions; he asks them in an extremely nice manner. Not all judges are like that, but he asks the most important questions and zeros in on the most important issues in the case.   
      I think I was asked to talk about a couple of cases that I argued. One of them was a woman who was convicted of extortion, testified extensively at her trial about how she had been severely beaten by her boyfriend and forced into committing the offense. And I took over the case after the trial proceedings and argued that her lawyer had been ineffective for failing to present expert testimony on battered women's syndrome.  
      It went up and down to the Court of Appeals and back, and Judge Kavanaugh wrote the opinion for the Court of Appeals saying that her lawyer had been ineffective for failing to retain an expert on battered women's syndrome, and he wrote a primer essentially on the defense of battered women's syndrome for lawyers, and over a dissent of one of his colleagues.   
      In another case that I argued and tried actually, it was a terrible tragedy of a person in the military who had died after a hazing incident involving a gang, and there were major issues about jury instructions and closing arguments and the case was reversed again in a 2-1 panel opinion.   
      And Judge Kavanaugh wrote a concurring opinion in that case talking about how important it was that the jury be properly instructed on the mens rea for the crime and that the while the while my client had committed some heinous acts, he deserved to have a fair trial. And the trial in this case had not been fair, and he wrote concurring opinion to emphasize that.   
      I should add that there's a number of other cases I've argued and our office has argued where Judge Kavanaugh has been very protective of making sure that mens rea has been proved in various cases, including a case called Burwell, where I was appointed amicus by the Court of Appeals for an end bank argument. Judge Kavanaugh was one of three judges that dissented from the end bank that adopted the views that I put forward.   
      He's also been a major advocate on the Court of Appeals of writing about the bizarre situation where defendants who go to trial and are acquitted of a number of counts in the case, including a case where everybody was acquitted of all but one count, but then they're sentenced for the conduct of which they were acquitted.  
      The judge takes that all into account and gives them a heavier sentence, which I should add that Congress could end very quickly in a bill with a couple of sentences telling judges they should not take account of acquitted conduct. He's been a very he's been very critical of that.   
      I should also add that I've served on two committees with him, so I think the bottom line is he's been extremely fair in criminal cases where it might be assumed that he would just reflexively affirm criminal cases. He has been extremely fair and thoughtful is my experience, and I've also served on a committee two committees with him, one of whom provides for CJA lawyers, Criminal Justice Act lawyers. His concern has always been to provide the most effective lawyers for defendants and the highest quality.  
      And I just want to end with one thing. He sends me e-mails occasionally talking about the how he likes the good job that our office does in defending criminal defendants and our clients. And he sent me an e-mail totally unsolicited, quoting the Chief Justice's dissent in a forfeiture case.  
      And he said, federal prosecutors, when they rise in court, represent the people of the United States, but so do defense lawyers one at a time. And Judge Kavanaugh sent that to me, that quote, and said, that's a nice line that summarized what you and your office do so well.  
      So all of that is why I'm here to support the nomination of Judge Kavanaugh for the Supreme Court.   
EASTMOND:  Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Feinstein, and other members of the committee, thank you for your opportunity thank you for the opportunity to be here today to share my experience and perspectives on gun violence in America. It needs to be a critical part of your consideration for any judge, particularly for the highest court in the land.   
      My view is significantly impacted by my experience as a survivor of gun violence at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida just six months ago, and also losing my uncle, Patrick Edwards, 15 years ago in Brooklyn, New York.  
      My name is Aalayah Eastmond, a senior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida. I work across the country to help amplify the voices of young people, and particularly young people and communities of color whose day-to-day experience with gun violence is always ignored, mischaracterized, marginalized and minimized by the press, the public, and the corporate gun lobby.  
      1:02, February 14th, fourth period, Holocaust History my last period of the day. The classroom door was locked today because of the new procedures. In the beginning of the period, we began presenting our hate projects that we've been working on. Nicholas Dworet was in my group; little did I know, 79 minutes from then he'd be saving my life.   
      2:21, we heard a round of extremely loud pops. We had no idea what it was or where it was coming from. The class was in complete silence and we all stared at each other in immediate fear. Within seconds, we heard it again. We all immediately ran. The class split in half. Half of my class ran to the safe spot, which was out of the view of the window that was in the classroom door; the other half was diagonally across from the window in complete view.  
      I was not in the safe spot. As I sat down, I remember telling myself if I were to get shot anywhere, I wouldn't make it. I needed to be behind something. The only thing in front of me was Nicholas Dworet. Helena Ramsay began passing books down so we cam shield ourselves shield ourselves from bullets, but yet everyone thought it was a drill.  
      2:22, I clenched the book from Helena and then looked down at my phone to call my mother. As I raised my finger to hit the green call button, the loud pops were now in my class. I thought to myself, what kind of senior prank is this?  
      As I began to see red on the floor, I assumed it was a paintball gun. I looked up and saw Helena Ramsay slumped over with her back against the wall. I began smelling and inhaling the smoke and gunpowder. Then Nicholas Dworet rapidly fell over in front of me.  
      I followed every movement of his body. When he fell over, I fell over with him. I then placed myself underneath his lifeless body, placing his arm across my body and my head underneath his back. Bullets continued flying.  
      I kept my eyes on the ground so I knew when to hold my breath and close my eyes when the shooter got near. I began talking to God. I told God that I knew I was going to die. I asked him, please make it fast; I didn't want to feel anything.  
      I asked for the bullet to go through my head so I wouldn't endure any pain. I laid there for about 30 seconds, still protected by his lifeless body waiting for the shooter to move on to the next class. After the shooting stopped in my class, his body became very heavy.  
      I couldn't breathe anymore. I rolled him off of me and placed his head on his arm so he wouldn't be touching the cold ground. I sat up and looked over. Helena was still in the same exact position I last saw her.   
      I froze, still in absolute view of the window of the shooter that shot of the window the shooter shot into. Two of my classmates then pulled me behind a filing cabinet. We were all crammed some on the phone with 911, some on the phone with their parents.   
      I immediately called my mom. I told her my last goodbyes. I told her how much I loved her. I apologized for all the things I might have done in my lifetime to upset her, and then the phone hung up.   
      I then called my father. I told him how much I loved him. I told him to tell my brothers I loved them and I said my last goodbyes. I couldn't hear anything they were saying to me but I made sure they could hear me. Not knowing whether it was one shooter or multiple and not knowing whether they were coming back or not was an unimaginable amount of fear. Sitting behind the filing cabinet waiting to die.   
      I began hyperventilating. My classmates began breathing with me and try to keep me calm and quiet work. They then covered my face. I felt like I was suffocating but it was to keep me quiet. 2:30, Broward County Police Department was heard from outside the shattered glass. I thought it was the shooter playing a trick. Then a SWAT team member came to check the pulse of Helena Nicholas. He then looked at me with compassion and said, I know.   
      We all ran out passing bodies in the hallway on the way out. When I got outside, I was completely disoriented. The police then said he's still on the loose, guys and we need you work with us. I was petrified. 4 o'clock. I finally found my friend and her mother. They noticed the unimaginable. They called the police over and they began picking body matter from my hair. I completely broke down. The police looked took me back on campus to gather photos of me and collect my bloody dress. They placed me in a chemical suit meant for chemical and biological exposure, then recording my recorded my statement.   
      9:30 at the Marriott Hotel I was finally allowed to physically touch my mother. It was absolutely horrific. So real and mind numbing. I will never forget what I saw, what I did and what I experienced that day. I will never forget Nicholas Dworet, who even in death helped protect and save my life. Days later, we received news that my mother would be having a miscarriage because of what the shock of the shooting did to her body. The shooting didn't only impact me on February 14, it impacts me every day of my life.   
      I've also lost a family member to gun violence. I lost my uncle Patrick Edwards in the streets of Brooklyn, New York. He was shot in the back. The bullet then pierced his heart. He was only 18 with his whole life ahead of him. And unfortunately, that is the same story of thousands of black and brown families across the country. Gun violence disproportionately impacts black and brown youth, whether that being police brutality, homicides or domestic violence. As for people of color, law enforcement is the shooter in some cases.   
      History of biased brutality and racism in so many communities. Like many of my brothers and sisters of color, I am not comforted by deputies with handguns, let alone assault rifles. I am very concerned since learning Brett Kavanaugh's views on guns and how he would strike down any assault weapons ban. Too many dangerous and prohibited people continue to be able to readily access and use dangerous weapons to terrorize Americans at home, work, church, school and on our streets and anywhere we go on our day-to-day life.   
      As you consider what to do and who to appoint to make us safer from gun violence, remember my story. Remember my classmates who died. Remember the victims of color who's that face mass shootings every day. Remember all victims of gun violence, from Parkland, Brooklyn, Miami, Milwaukee, Oakland and all over America. As you make your final decision, think about it as if you had to justify and defend your choice to those who we lost to gun violence.   
      If Kavanaugh doesn't have the decency to shake hands with the father of a victim, he definitely won't have the decency to make life-changing decisions that affect real people. The youth is urging our society to society to recognize the depth and seriousness of the gun violence epidemic in America. We are all here with an urgent message for you. If the youth across the country can fight to eradicate gun violence, why can't judges, lawmakers and Donald Trump understand that young people are dying from this senseless gun violence? Thank you.   
 
TAIBLESON:  Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Senator Whitehouse and members of the committee, I'm honored to be testifying before you today. My name is Rebecca Taibleson. I'm here today from Milwaukee, Wisconsin. I clerked for by Brett Kavanaugh in 2010 and '11 and I enthusiastically support his nomination to be an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court. I'd like to talk about two things today.   
      First, what Brett Kavanaugh is like as a judge and second, what Brett Kavanaugh is like as a person. At work in his chambers, Judge Kavanaugh has a motto of sorts. It's process protects us. I'll admit, it is not very catchy but it's true to the judge and to his core judicial philosophy. What it means is that Judge Kavanaugh goes through an intense step-by-step process in order to decide each and every case.   
      That process starts with an open mind and a foundational commitment to the belief that either side might be right. Judge Kavanaugh then reads and analyzes every brief and rereads every precedent in the case and he insists that his law clerks find the very best version of each argument in the case, even when the lawyers themselves have not. In addition to the parties' arguments, Judge Kavanaugh also takes very seriously the views of his colleagues, the other judges on the case, especially when they differ from his own.   
TAIBLESON:  I can remember
GRASSLEY:  There's something wrong with the system.  
GRASSLEY:  OK.   
TAIBLESON:  Is this OK, ma'am? OK.  
TAIBLESON:  OK.   
GRASSLEY:  Yeah. Start over again, Rebecca.  
TAIBLESON:  Yes, sirs.   
      Mr. Chairman, Ranking Senator Whitehouse, and members of the committee, I am honored to be testifying before you today. My name is Rebecca Taibleson; I'm here today from Milwaukee, Wisconsin. I clerked for Brett Kavanaugh in 2010 and '11 and I enthusiastically support his nomination to be an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court.   
      I'd like to talk about two things today first, what Brett Kavanaugh is like as a judge and second, what Brett Kavanaugh is like as a person. At work in his chambers Judge Kavanaugh has a motto of sorts "process protects us." I'll admit it's not very catchy, but it's true to the judge and to his core judicial philosophy.   
      What it means is that Judge Kavanaugh goes through an intense step-by-step process in order to decide each and every case. That process starts with an open mind and a foundational commitment to the belief that either side might be right. Judge Kavanaugh then reads and analyzes every brief and rereads every relevant precedent and he insists that his clerks find the very best version of every argument in the case even when the lawyers themselves have not.   
      In addition to the party's arguments, Judge Kavanaugh also take very seriously the views of his colleagues the other judges especially when they differ from his own. I can remember all too clearly, being corrected by Judge Kavanaugh once when I, fresh out of law school, spoke too dismissively about another judge's view of the case; I learned from that.   
      Understanding Judge Kavanaugh's humility and respect for his colleagues is essential to understanding his identity as a judge. Judge Kavanaugh completes his entire process from scratch for every issue in every case. It's no coincidence he's often the last person at work in the courthouse each night, but it's worth it. This process as he says protects us; it protects against snap decisions, shortcuts and prejudgments.  
      By never skipping a step, never giving short shrift to an argument or ignoring a precedent, Judge Kavanaugh ensures that his decisions are based on the law and the facts of each case and only those things. That process also protect us American citizens from having unelected judge's ruling based on their own predispositions or preferences.   
      Only after completing that process, does the judge decide once and for all what he thinks and once he's decided he is difficult to budge. He is independent and stubbornly so; he cannot be pressured by his law clerks or his colleagues and he cannot be intimidated by other actors in government. It is simply not part of his process.   
      Politics also have no place in Judge Kavanaugh's process. Having known the judge for almost 10 years and having worked with him very closely, I myself do not know what his views are on the political issues of the day, and as a law clerk, it would have been unthinkable even mention the political implications of a case. In fact, had been known in advance how to decide a case based on the parties or the amici or some policy goal, we might have skipped a few steps in the process and got home a bit earlier at night but he never did and so we never did.   
      For those reasons, if you want to know what Judge Kavanaugh is like as a person, his cases are not the best place to look because he keeps his preferences out of them. His process reflects his fairness, work ethic and judicial temperament, but the outcomes are based on the law not his personal views.   
      But I can tell you that as a person, Brett Kavanaugh stands out. He has testified extensively this week, so I don't need to tell you how smart, thoughtful and unflappable he is. When his guard is down, when he's not before the committee or on television, he is the same way. But in my view, those are not his most remarkable qualities.   
      Instead, it's every day, universal, disarming kindness. I sometimes find myself saying that Judge Kavanaugh is normal or approachable, but those cliches are not quite right. Instead, those are compliments designed for federal judges, who no one expects to be normal or approachable.   
      In truth, Judge Kavanaugh is far, far nicer than is normal and far more approachable than almost anyone you will ever approach. He has an easy laugh and a great sense of humor. I, myself rarely am rarely I'm funny as Senator Booker has pointed out but he lasted all of my jokes, including, especially, the jokes at his expense.   
      Although his credentials are elite, you would never know it to talk to him. The judge is a regular at a neighborhood bar, for example, where he's partial to Budweiser and a hamburger and where the longtime regular bartender did not even know that Brett Kavanaugh was a lawyer until he saw his nomination to the United States Supreme Court. If he is confirmed Judge Kavanaugh's humility, collegiality and kindness will stand out on the Supreme Court.   
Judge Kavanaugh is going to stand out on the Supreme Court for another reason as well, which is his support for women in the legal profession. Elite legal circles are predominantly male. The year I clerked on the Supreme Court, for example, 26 of the 39 law clerks were men and that is typical.   
      Just this morning, the New York Times ran an article about the barriers faced by women and people of color throughout the legal profession. According to that article, an ABA report found that in 2016 2016 only 35 percent of active American lawyers are women. Judge Kavanaugh, by contrast, has hired more women than men as law clerks. One year, all four of his clerks were women, which is a first for the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. That is something no Supreme Court justice has ever done.   
      After hiring us, Judge Kavanaugh goes to bat for us. As the members of this committee know, hard work and smarts are not always enough to reach the top of your profession. Instead, it takes guidance from people who have been there and advocates willing to fight for you. Studies have shown that women are often at a disadvantage on those fronts, but Judge Kavanaugh is a force of nature.   
      Thanks to his sponsorship, about 85 percent of Judge Kavanaugh's female clerks have gone to clerk on the Supreme Court. We have clerked for justices across the court including Justices Kagan, Breyer and Sotomayor. We have served in all three branches of state and federal governments. We are professors, prosecutors and nonprofit attorneys. One of us is now even judge herself.   
      I know of no federal judge who has more effectively supported women in his profession than Brett Kavanaugh. Ten years after I first met Judge Kavanaugh, I'm now figuring out how to be a lawyer and mom to three kids, age 3 and under. In fact, if you heard a baby crying outside this chamber earlier this morning, that is my fault; she is three months old and she absolutely insisted on coming.   
      I know firsthand how important it is to have an advocate like Brett Kavanaugh and I attribute my still vibrant legal career in large part to him. I am only one of many. A significant number of Judge Kavanaugh's former clerks have been here for these hearings and we have uniformly recommended him for his character, his work ethic and his kindness.   
      The United States and the American people would be well-served with Judge Kavanaugh on the Supreme Court. Thank you.   
CORBIN:  Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Feinstein and distinguished members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, I'm privileged to represent 130 million people with preexisting conditions today and I'm grateful for the invitation to testify before you. My name is Jackson Corbin and I'm 13 years old. I'm a lot like other teenagers. I love books, Marvel movies and I love to play Minecraft and Fortnite with my friends. 10 years ago, my brother, mother and I were all diagnosed with Noonan syndrome, a genetic condition that affects various systems of the body.   
      As a result of my Noonan syndrome, I have a lot of preexisting conditions. Noonan syndrome effects my growth, so I'll never be as tall or as strong as other people my age, I have stomach issues, reflux and I get really bad headaches. My most severe condition is my Von Willebrand's disease, a form of hemophilia. This means I can't play contact sports or do things like roughhouse, roller skate or jump on trampolines. I take medication to control my reflux and to clot my blood if I get hurt.   
      Having my clotting medicine at home means I don't have to go to the emergency room every time I lose a tooth or get a bad bruise or cut. My brother Henry is my best friend. He is 10 and a half years old and he has Noonan syndrome too. We do everything together, including going to our specialist visits. My mom always says the greatest thing she ever did was give the two of us to each other.   
      Noonan syndrome affects everyone differently, so in addition to having all the same conditions as me, including Von Willebrand's disease, Henry has even more special healthcare needs than I do. When Henry was a baby, he had a life-saving stomach surgery and a blood transfusion. Now he has what's called gastroparesis, which means he vomits almost every day. Sometimes even in his sleep.   
      The medicine he takes helps but not all the time. We share a room and at first it was scary to see him vomit in his sleep but now I'm used to it. When I hear him gagging, I roll him over so he doesn't choke and run to get my parents. Henry also has heart problems and asthma. I worry about Henry a lot. I have heard my mom and dad say that they are grateful for our insurance because the cost of our care is more than my family makes in a year.   
      That means if the Affordable Care Act is repealed and Henry and I lose our insurance, my parents will not be able to afford to pay for our care. I have been fighting for healthcare for nearly two years. Last year, in the first speech I ever gave on the lawn of the capital, I compared myself to Dr. Seuss's "The Lorax". The Lorax says, I am the Lorax and I speak for the trees. And so I said, I am Jackson and I speak for the children. I said that because I had met so many children with special healthcare needs who are unable to speak for themselves.   
      I wanted to be their voice. But as my journey continued and I met even more children and adults with preexisting conditions who like me and Henry are scared for their future, I realized I'm not only speaking for the children anymore. Today especially I speak for everyone. I speak for myself, Henry and all the other children across the country with special healthcare needs. I speak for the parents who struggle with their own health issues while caring for while while caring for their their children, including my own mom, who has Noonan syndrome too.   
      I speak for every person with a disability who high-fives me in the Senate hallways as they fight for our care. I speak for every person with a disability who will never be able to live independently. I even speak for the man who has lupus who altered the suit I'm wearing today. Most importantly, I speak for every American whose life could change tomorrow with a new diagnosis. My Noonan's syndrome is a part of who I am.   
      It's been a part of me since the day I was born and will be a part of me for the rest of my life. If you destroy protections for preexisting conditions, you leave me and all kids and adults like me without care and without the ability to afford our care, all because of who we are. We deserve better than that. I might be a kid but I'm still an American. The decisions you are making today will affect my generation's ability to have access to affordable healthcare.   
      We must have justices on the Supreme Court who will save the Affordable Care Act save the Affordable Care Act, safeguard preexisting conditions and protect our care. Please give us the chance to be healthy, to grow up and to lead this country one day. I know I want that chance. Thank you.   
GRASSLEY:  Hunter    
GRASSLEY:  Mr. LaChance, go ahead.   
LACHANCE:  Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Feinstein and members of the Senate Judiciary Committee. my name is Hunter LaChance. I live in Kennebunkport, Maine and I'm a sophomore at Kennebunk High School. I'm 15 years old and I suffer from asthma. I live in a state that has some of the highest rates of asthma in the country. According to the Maine Center for Disease Control, nearly 12 percent of adults in our state have asthma, compared with nine percent nationally. Maine children also suffer from a higher rate of asthma than the national average. I am one of the statistics. Despite Maine's many beauties, it has worse air quality than most people realize. Because Maine sits at the end of America's tailpipe, air pollution from upwind states is carried into Maine by prevailing winds.   
      Air pollution makes life extremely difficult for those of us with asthma and makes it harder for me to breathe. For me to live a healthy life, air pollution needs to decrease, not increase. I'm concerned that the Supreme Court could make major decisions in the next few years that will cause air pollution in Maine to increase if Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed. Many people in this room may have asthma or know someone who does, so what I'm about to describe to you may be familiar.   
      Here is a coffee stirrer. If you have one, I encourage you to put your mouth and try breathing through it. Now imagine only being able to breathe through this sized hole for an hour or a day or even a week. This is what it's been like during an asthmatic attack. Unfortunately I'm not alone in having asthma impact my life. Asthma affects nearly 25 million Americans, including over 6 million children.   
      2 million people go to the emergency rooms each year because of asthma. I'm here today because my future and my health may depend on it. I'm just your every day kid from Maine. I play sports, like to swim and love playing in the snow. But my active life changed when I was diagnosed with asthma at the age of 10. Suddenly, everything became more difficult. I was sidelined from sports, began missing school and our parents constantly worried about my health.  
      The year after I was diagnosed, I missed close to quarter of the school year. I can vividly remember times when my asthma attacks were so strong and scary that I was removed from class by my teachers and sent to the nurse's office. Most of the time, the nurse sent me home or asked my parents to get medical attention. I remember one really bad attack when I was home sick for three wicks three weeks.   
      Asthma is the leading reason why kids miss school, and has directly impacted my ability to learn from my teachers and spend time with my friends.   
      Although air pollution doesn't cause asthma, it triggers attacks. On ozone alert days, people across the country have trouble breathing. And this should worry everyone. It worries me. In Maine, we need strong federal regulations on air pollution, because pollution doesn't stop at state borders. If states upwind from Maine are allowed to pollute more because federal regulations are weakened, then that's bad for me, it's bad for Mainers, and it's bad for anyone in American with a respiratory disease or asthma.   
      That's why I'm here. I'm deeply concerned that if Judge Kavanaugh is on the Supreme Court, he would vote to weaken laws that protect my health. Because he already has. In a 2012 ruling, he rejected the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule based on the Clean Air Act's Good Neighbor Provision, which regulates air that crosses state lines. According to the EPA, this rule reduces sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide pollutants, and will prevent 34,000 premature deaths.   
      During his time on the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, Mr. Kavanaugh has repeatedly struck down other Clean Air Act protections. This worries me a lot, because clean air is a life or death issue for so many people, like me. We need a Supreme Court that will protect clean air, because lives depend on it.   
      We also need a Supreme Court that will uphold the protections to address climate change, because my generation's future depends on it. For me, climate change means that life will be even more difficult, with more ozone alert days, more dust in the air from forest fires, and more mold due to extreme weather and flooding.   
      Here's my coffee stirrer again. Next time you have the chance, pick one up and try breathing through it and see how long you can last. This is what it feels like to suffer through asthma through asthma. If the Supreme Court fails to protect clean air, then it's failing to protect me and millions of other Americans.   
      Please don't confirm someone for the Supreme Court with a record like Judge Kavanaugh's, a record that can mean more air pollution, more asthma attacks, and more premature deaths for the millions of Americans unfortunate enough to be afflicted with asthma like me.   
      Thank you for letting me testify today.   
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Mr. Lachance. Now Ms. Mahoney.   
MAHONEY:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Whitehouse Senator Whitehouse, and members of the committee. I am honored to add my voice in support of Judge Kavanaugh today. I worked with him at the Solicitor General's Office and I appeared before him on the D.C. Circuit, and it's hard for me to think of anyone who is more qualified.   
      I'd like to make two points:  first, I want to share my view that Judge Kavanaugh has much in common with my former colleague, Chief Justice Roberts, whom the Senate voted to confirm by a wide margin. Second, I want to explain why Judge Kavanaugh's extraordinary record of mentoring female lawyers is so important to my profession.   
      In 2005, I testified before this committee in support of Chief Justice Roberts's confirmation, and I'm struck by the many similarities between him and Judge Kavanaugh. Some are obvious:  both are extraordinary lawyers, both worked in the White House Counsel's Office, and the Solicitor General's Office, and both served as judges on the D.C. Circuit.   
      But they also share a civility and even-handedness on the bench that reflects their genuine effort to consider all sides of an argument thoroughly before reaching any conclusions.   
      I've had the pleasure of arguing before both men. Like the Chief Justice, Judge Kavanaugh asks difficult and incisive questions, but he's polite and he conveys his thoughts with an open mind. As the ABA panel confirmed this morning, my view is widely shared by the Bar. Don Verrilli, Solicitor General during the Obama administration has called Judge Kavanaugh a brilliant jurist who is a gracious person on and off the bench.   
      And a bipartisan group of appellate practitioners praise his unfailing courtesy to counsel and to to the other judges and his colleagues. In an era when some appellate judges have behaved like brusque advocates for one side during oral argument, Judge Kavanaugh has been a model of the proper judicial disposition.   
      The Chief Justice and Judge Kavanaugh also understand the proper role of a federal judge, to be an independent, neutral arbiter. During his confirmation hearing, the Chief Justice famously described judges as umpires who apply the rules without fear or favor. I think it is fair to say that the Chief Justice has done so, at various times both sides of the aisle have denounced his rulings, just like the same thing that happens to umpires.   
      And Judge Kavanaugh has similarly demonstrated impartiality and fairness in his 12 years on the D.C. Circuit. He repeatedly ruled against the Bush administration, where he worked prior to becoming a judge in his first 3 years on the bench. He has ruled in favor of an Al-Qaeda terrorist, in favor of a pro-choice Democratic interest group and against the Republican Party, and to the surprise of some, even the ACLU has recognized that Judge Kavanaugh has been sympathetic to Title VII claims.   
      As Judge Kavanaugh has explained in speeches over the years, a judge must check any prior political allegiances at the door, and I am confident he will stay true to that ideal.   
      Second, Judge Kavanaugh also stands out as a mentor to women lawyers. I know you've heard the statistics a lot, but they're worth repeating. Over half of Judge Kavanaugh's law clerks have been women; 21 of those 25 have been hired to clerk on the Supreme Court, and this is simply astounding. These women have gone on to serve in all three branches of government, in the White House, in the Solicitor General's Office, four are federal prosecutors, one is a Deputy Solicitor General of the District of Columbia, another, as you just heard, serves as a judge on the 11th Circuit.   
      It's difficult to overstate how important opportunities like these can be for a lawyer's career, especially in appellate practice. Credentials like a Supreme Court clerkship or a job at the Solicitor General's Office are keys that unlock doors at the highest levels of the legal profession. Very few women have historically held these elite positions.   
      When I clerked for Chief Justice Rehnquist in 1979, almost 80 percent of the law clerks at the court were male, and a large gender imbalance endures today. Almost twice as many men as women have been hired as Supreme Court Clerks since 2005. In the most recent Supreme Court term, women delivered only 12 percent of the oral arguments, and women make up only 19 percent of law firm equity partners.   
      I was one of the lucky few. I argued 21 cases before the Supreme Court, and this never would have happened without the mentorship of a federal judge, just like Judge Kavanaugh does for his clerks. Chief Justice Rehnquist helped launch my appellate career by hiring me as his clerk, and in 1988, he then arranged for me to argue my first Supreme Court case.  
MAHONEY:  I was the first woman to receive the honor of being appointed by the Supreme Court to argue a case by invitation. With that argument under my belt, Chief Justice Roberts then recruited me in 1991 to join him in the Solicitor General's Office as one of four deputies, a position that has rarely been held by women. These were the opportunities that made it possible for me to compete with the men who dominate the Supreme Court Bar. For more than a decade, Judge Kavanaugh has been instrumental in opening these doors for a new generation of women lawyers.  
      He's been a teacher, advisor and advocate for women in ways that unquestionably demonstrate his commitment to equality and that will ultimately reduce persistent gender disparities in the legal profession.  
      In short, Judge Kavanaugh's independence, his civility and open-mindedness and his generous mentorship are just a few of the many characteristics that make him superbly qualified to serve on the Supreme Court.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Ms. Mahoney. Now, Ms. Smith.  
SMITH:  Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the Judiciary Committee. Thank you for this opportunity. My name is Melissa Smith, and I am a Union member and public schoolteacher at U.S. Grant High School on the southwest side of Oklahoma City. I am also the very proud daughter of a police officer who served his community for 41 years and who taught me how to use my voice.  
      He made sure that I not only knew my rights, but that I knew how to exercise them. Because of my father, I went into juvenile justice, where I quickly realized that most teenagers have no idea that they have rights. So I became a high school social studies teacher, where I can open my students eyes to the concepts of equality, justice and fairness.   
      I teach them that, under the U.S. Constitution, they do have rights. I teach them the impact of the law and their roles and responsibilities within the government so that they can be engaged and active in our democracy.   
      Today, I am honored to be able to show my students exactly what it means to use your voice and participate in our government at the highest level. As you consider your vote on this lifetime appointment, please consider our experiences.   
      Oklahoma City Public Schools is the state's largest district, where almost 90 percent of our families are economically disadvantaged. I'm a proud general at U.S Grant High School, and we have the most dedicated staff and incredible students.   
      Our district has had to cut almost $40 million from its budget in the last two years. Our fine arts budget was slashed by 50 percent, and our library media budget was completely eliminated. Our school building was built for 1,200 people, just 11 years ago, yet we currently have 2,220 staff members and students.  
      The classrooms that have almost 40 students rarely have enough desks for all of them to sit in. It is often first come, first serve, to those classrooms. Some teachers don't even have classrooms at all. They have all of their belongings, textbooks, and supplies on carts, and they push them from classroom to classroom, hour to hour.  
      I'm telling you about our funding crisis in Oklahoma for two reasons. First, because Judge Kavanaugh's stated position on private school vouchers would exacerbate the situation in Oklahoma City. Vouchers do nothing to help student achievement, but do everything to undermine the public schools that 90 percent of children in this nation attend.  
      Siphoning more funding away from public education will destroy public schools. The second reason I'm telling you about our funding crisis is that I have seen, firsthand, how the collective power of unions allows individuals to band together to bargain for resources for students and teachers.  
Judge Kavanaugh has a strong history of siding with big business, over the needs, rights and safety of individual employees. His record shows that he side with employers that do not adhere to their collective bargaining agreement, and he does not see the need for Union representation in employee meetings.  
      I can tell you that, through my union, I've learned the power of collective voice. I can advocate from my own working conditions which are the same learning conditions for my students. Unions give voice and agency to people who can't find it otherwise. They make it possible for us to accomplish, together, that we could not do on our own.   
      Five months ago, Oklahoma teachers walked out our classrooms. Our legislature passed a $6,000 pay raise, in an attempt to stop that walkout, but we were fighting for more than just a pay raise. We were fighting for our students and their needs that often go well beyond what you would expect a teacher to have to take care of.  
      I have physically picked up a teenager off the floor and carried her to the counselors office. She was sobbing, saying that she didn't want to live anymore. Thank goodness our counselor was able to be at school that day.  
      I have seen the terror on a transgender student's face when he shared that he identifies as male, and then that terror to joy when I, as a trusted adult, accepted him for who he his. Just last week, a fellow teacher wrote a reference letter for a student in his family, for their hearing to determine whether or not they can remain in this country.   
      She stressed about it for days, because she needed it to be perfect. Her student has never known anything in his life but Oklahoma, and he is terrified of being sent to a place that his not his home.  
      The morning after the 2016 president election was a tough one at U.S Grant. Many of our students are undocumented or have undocumented family members. The U.S. Grant family rallied around all of our students, more than usual, on that day.   
      We don't ask if they or their parents are undocumented, that's not our purpose. And so far, the U.S. Supreme Court agrees. Now why I am sharing these experiences with you, because I worry about my students and who will look out for them.   
      I worry that our government is too far removed from the people it serves, and that the consequences of that gap are far more dangerous than we realize. If confirmed, Judge Kavanaugh's decisions will impact not just teachers and students in schools now, but the futures of my students and for generations to come.  
      The experiences of my students and fellow staff members show that there's a real impact of Judge Kavanaugh's jurisprudence on America's future. Thank you for allowing me to be here today. I would like to end my statement the same way I end every single Friday in class with my students. Be the example, have a good weekend, and please make good choices.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Ms. Smith. Now, Mr. - Mr. Christmas.   
CHRISTMAS:  Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Feinstein and other distinguished members of this committee, I am honored, grateful and humble to appear before you, endorse - to endorse the nomination of Judge Brett Kavanaugh, to sit as an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court.   
      I have known this nominee for three decades. He is a close, personal friend. I hope my testimony today will illuminate a side of Judge Kavanaugh that is not often seen in media counts. I met Judge Kavanaugh in 1988, during my first year at Yale Law School, when he was second-year law student.   
      In addition to both of us pursing our love of the law, we watched "Sports Center," played pickup basketball games, and loved going to Yale football games. We became fast friends. The following year, we roomed together with other law students in a house behind the Yale gym.  
      I've always admired Judge Kavanaugh's ability to create deep relationships with people from all walks of life, conservative, liberal, athlete, academic, male, female, white, black. I think the one reason for this is he never assumes he's the smartest person in the room. Judge Kavanaugh deeply believes he can learn something from everyone.   
      A wonder confidant, Judge Kavanaugh has always made me feel comfortable speaking to him about basically anything, because he generally cares how others - others feel and authentically tries to understand how they think.  
      During law school, I often sought out Judge Kavanaugh's advice. He would implore me to first, understand the issue from all points of view, "Put yourself in their shoes," I recall him advising me, "How would that make you feel?" And then he would challenge me, "Demand of myself that which you ask from others." Should he be fortunate enough to be confirmed, I believe Judge Kavanaugh will bring that same humility and compassion to the Supreme Court. It's who Judge Kavanaugh is.   
      Since graduation, the same eight law school roommates have spent a long weekend together every year, with an astonishingly minimal absentee rate. And Judge Kavanaugh has been no exception.   
      These 26 reunions have kept us all close, even as our families and careers demanded more time from each of us. I will never forget a long drive I took to Bucks County, Pennsylvania for one of our early annual reunions.   
Judge Kavanaugh listened and asked questions for the whole ride, as I explained my bewilderment over those who deny the continuing effects of slavery and Jim Crow laws.   
      While I was raised in California, I have deep family roots in Mississippi. I believed then, as I do now, that the laws of our country must remain responsive to historical prejudice, discrimination, oppression and mistreatment of African-Americans.   
      There was no doubt left in my mind, following that ride, that Judge Kavanaugh deeply cared, and still cares, about truly understanding my black experience and point of view.   
      Over the years, Judge Kavanaugh and I have traveled together many times in and outside the country. I drove with Judge Kavanaugh to Boston to watch him run his first Boston Marathon.   
Judge Kavanaugh made the trip to California for my wedding, and I flew back to D.C. for his. While our age is no longer conducive to pick-up basketball games, we have been able to commiserate over coaching our children and learning that the first rule of being a good youth basketball coach is understanding you're no longer a player.   
      Our support for one another has been steady and reliable force as we move through life's ups and downs. Earlier this year, Judge Kavanaugh and I, along with other law school roommates and friends, gathered over a weekend for the funeral of the son of another roommate.   
      I witnessed Judge Kavanaugh's love, care and support of our friend during the most difficult of times. He attended dinners, participated in fellowship well into the night, and spent the day at the funeral service in support of the family. In a time of personal crisis, I won't need to look far for my friend because Judge Kavanaugh will already be there.   
      So you may ask:  What does coaching basketball, showing up at each other's wedding, listening to my experiences as a black man living in America, or attending a funeral have to do with determining whether Judge Kavanaugh should become a Supreme justice Supreme Court justice?   
      The answer is, it speaks directly to his humanity. Judge Kavanaugh cares. He is far from being an ideologue. He does naturally what a good judge should do, seek to understand before offering an opinion.   
Judge Kavanaugh is a tremendous son, friend, husband and father. He's honest, empathetic and intellectually curious. That's the person I know.   
      Over the course of my life, I've found that a true test of a friendship is when support for a friend is indeed inconvenient. For me, from the perspective of a lifelong Democrat, it is inconvenient to support Judge Kavanaugh, especially during this time of unprecedented partisan divide and polarization among Americans.   
      But I know it is the right thing to do. As an American, I'm quite concerned about the attacks on our esteemed institutions like the judiciary.   
      My expectation of any judicial nominee I support, especially when it is for the Supreme Court, is that he or she possess a powerful sense of fairness and impartiality.   
      As an African-American, I expect a nominee I support to have a deep sense of obligation to protect the interests of those disempowered, particularly those whose voices are too often drowned out of our political discourse, and cannot be heard.   
      Again, all this requires a judge who's compassionate, humble and principled. Judge Kavanaugh is such a nominee. Everyone here today is well aware of Judge Kavanaugh's extraordinary qualifications, both educationally and professionally.   
      However, it is Judge Kavanaugh's humanity that compelled me to come here today to testify on his behalf. For this reason, without equivocation or reservation, I respectfully urge this committee and the Senate to confirm Judge Brett Kavanaugh as an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court. Thank you.   
GRASSLEY:  Thank you. As chairman of the committee, I should thank all of you for your testimony. I know you have to work hard to do it. Some of you traveled a long way, so just generally, thank you.   
      And then I'm going to ask my questions, and then I'll call on Senator Whitehouse and I would ask for many 10 or 15 minutes, if one of my Republican colleagues would moderate while I step out and I'll be close by. OK.  
      I'm going to start with you, Mr. Christmas. And I'm going I'm going to say that for four days now, we've had a lot of people exercise their public constitutional rights to speak, as you've heard it at this day, afraid of Justice Kavanaugh or Kavanaugh being a justice on the Supreme Court.   
      We've had three or four panel people right here that you've heard their own testimony. And so there's this fear that he doesn't might not take into consideration the the needs of people less fortunate than he is, with various problems that we've heard expressed here.   
      So I think you probably has spoke a little bit to this in your testimony, but emphasize for us some speak not to me, but to the people that have these concerns.   
CHRISTMAS:  Well, Senator, I I understand those concerns. I do not share that fear. Brett is one of the most thoughtful, empathetic people I know. I've spent much time with him, talking about issues that are very dear to me. He has been generous with his insight. He cares.   
      And and I think that the empathy that that he naturally exhibits will serve him well. And I would encourage people to understand that this man is thoughtful, is humble, and thinks to understand before he makes himself understood.   
GRASSLEY:  From your point I'll follow up. From your point as a lawyer, and and as you expect a judge to look at the facts of the case and the what the law is, and leave their own personal views out of it.   
      So can you explain to the people that have these concerns about him, those things that have to be taken into consideration that maybe don't deal exactly with a person that has special medical problems like you've heard here today?   
CHRISTMAS:  Yes. And I recall Brett when he came to my wedding. I should say Judge Kavanaugh. And he spent time with my family. I I I recall him speaking at length with with members of my family, who had no real knowledge of what it's like to be a judge and be involved in in in D.C. in the way that Judge Kavanaugh is.   
      And and I was just struck by how easily and comfortably he was able to speak to everybody who he had just met during that wedding. There was a period where my niece graduated from Howard University. And I had mentioned to Judge Kavanaugh that I may come out.   
      And and he arranged for 20 of of the members of my family to to tour the West Wing. And he showed up on a Saturday with a couple of his aides. That's the sort of person he is.   
      So I understand the concerns, but the man I know is generous with his time and thought. And I love the discussion about process. He seeks to not be influenced by people outside. And he's one of the most prepared, thoughtful people I know.  
GRASSLEY:  Yes. I will end with Mr. Kramer. I not being a lawyer, but I can assume what public defenders do, you're dealing mostly defending people that don't have resources of their own and, in fact, that may be 100 percent of your clientele.   
      You've heard several days that my colleague from New Jersey has expressed concerns about about people that can't defend themselves in court. The jury system not working the way it traditionally works, and mandatory minimums and all that.   
      Can you give people of low income that you represent, maybe other problems, that the assurance that they're going to get their concerns addressed the way they ought to be through somebody that's on the Supreme Court?  
KRAMER:  Thank you, Chairman Grassley. Yes, absolutely. I and I tried to get that out. The fact, the reason I'm here is because of the fairness that Judge Kavanaugh has shown. Our clients are without resources and tend not to be a very popular group.  
      And Judge Kavanaugh has shown, through my experience with my numerous arguments in front of him and the opinions he's written, a a belief and a fundamental and I share completely share Senator Booker's views on the criminal justice system.   
      But Judge Kavanaugh has shown through his opinions in the criminal cases that I've argued, as well as his service on the CJA Committee that I've been involved with, a concern for the fundamental fairness of the system and a that people should be, even though they are without resources and represented by a public defender, that they should have the best representation possible. And that's why I whole-heartedly support his nomination.  
      And I note that it one more thing, that it's in a sense to me remarkable, usually a judge who's wants to be confirmed for a position or another court would never have a public defender near their hearings talking in support of them. And I think that, again, shows Judge Kavanaugh's concern for the fundamental fairness of the system. And that's why I support him.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. Senator Whitehouse.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Thank you, chairman.  
      Aalayah, may I use your first name? I could call you Ms. Eastmond, if you wanted.  
EASTMOND:  No, it's fine.  
WHITEHOUSE:  OK. Aalayah, I just wanted to tell you that you have had to live through an experience that no child should have to live through. And what you've brought into this hearing room from that experience has been stunning.  
EASTMOND:  Thank you.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Your testimony was incredibly well delivered 
EASTMOND:  Thank you.  
WHITEHOUSE:  and incredibly well prepared. And I hope that, not only you but your friends and family who are with you here today are very, very proud of what you've been able to draw out of that horrible experience you've went through.  
EASTMOND:  Thank you.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Take care of yourself, because these things don't do away.  
EASTMOND:  Yes.  
WHITEHOUSE:  But keep doing what you're doing.  
EASTMOND:  Thank you.  
WHITEHOUSE:  And do it with pride and confidence, because you really shone today.   
EASTMOND:  Thank you.   
WHITEHOUSE:  And, Jackson, may I use your first name as well?   
      I just want to thank you as well. It may seem a little weird coming from an old guy across a podium, but when I was 13, I was about your size. And I know what it's like to be the small kid. And I just want you to know that when you spoke today, you were the biggest person in this room. And you did a wonderful, wonderful job, and you brought a really important message to us. So to you and to your family and friends who are here, congratulations, well done. Please be proud and keep your voice.   
CORBIN:  Thank you.   
WHITEHOUSE:  Hunter, you and I may I use your first name also? At some point, you know, you can say, "No, I'd prefer you call me Mr. Lachance."  
LACHANCE:  No, Hunter's fine.   
WHITEHOUSE:  OK, Hunter's fine.   
      You and I share a similar predicament. We are inhabitants of downwind states. Rhode Island, like Maine, is a tailpipe state. And if it weren't for the EPA, there is nothing that our state environmental officials could do to protect us from out-of-state pollution, very often from coal-burning plants and so forth. And we have the same situation you do. We have a lot of kids. And when the air gets bad, you often see them in the emergency room. You have situations in Rhode Island where we're, you know, you're driving in to work in the morning, and it's a beautiful day. The sun shining. You should be out playing. You know these days. But on the radio, you hear, "Today's a bad air day."   
      And we want little kids, we want old people and we want people with breathing difficulties to stay inside. On what otherwise would be a great day for you to be out swimming and playing sports and doing all those things. So the voice that you brought here was very, very important. To each of you, I would say, part of the problem that I have in this whole nominations process is that you are up against enormously powerful forces on the other side. The National Rifle Association essentially has dominion over Congress with respect to everything that has to do with guns; and the ammunition that tore through your friends. The I don't know what you'd call it, a mania, a fetish, an ideological crusade against providing your family with reliable health care simply makes no sense to me, and yet it's enormously powerful, and we came very, very close to a vote here where it would have been taken away from you.   
      And so and, of course, the polluters have almost as much dominion around here in Congress as the NRA does. They bring in phony scientists who quarrel with the real science because they're paid to quarrel, even if their science isn't real. And they do economic studies that only show the harm to the polluting companies and totally omit what it's like to be you on a day that you can't breathe, except like through that little coffee straw.   
      So this is a very one-sided place. And the forces a that have the most money and that make the most money are able to use it here in ways that keep it very, very unbalanced.   
      And my concern is that the current Republican majority on the Supreme Court and the decisions of Justice Kavanaugh reflect a desire to enhance that power.  
      To defer decisions that the court could make into this very unbalanced forum, to diminish the regulatory agencies or there's the actual expertise to understand, say, how chlorofluorocarbons work or what a loose guide filing should look like for a new stock offering, or complicated things like that.   
      And so that's my biggest concern. And I'm not going to take any more time because I've I've burned it all already. But I really, really was so impressed with each of the three of you, and I just wanted to say thank you, well done, don't ever give up.   
      Those other forces may be big, but this is still our country. Thank you.   
HATCH:  As a public defender, you've spent your career representing defendants that don't have the money for a fancy law firm.   
KRAMER:  Yes.   
HATCH:  Or any kind of law firm that may have been accused of some very serious misconduct. Now when appearing before Judge Kavanaugh, have you ever felt that your class, economic status or situation or a charge, conduct affected the judge's treatment of your client?   
KRAMER:  No, I would say just the opposite, that they've always been treated without regard to any of those factors.   
HATCH:  How how have you ever had a case where you felt your client's economic situation or a charge, conduct affected Judge Kavanaugh's decision in the case?  
KRAMER:  I don't think it's ever affected his decision in a case. He examines the facts and the law, and decides based on that without regard to those circumstances.  
HATCH:  Well he he as a judge is most well-known for his jurisprudence on broad structural issues like the separation of statutory interpretation or the well, sometimes his jurisprudence on individual rights gets less attention.   
      For example, his discussions of the importance of mens rea requirements, which I am very concerned about, and the problems among many things. And the problems inherent in sentencing based on acquitted conduct.   
      How is the judge how has Judge Kavanaugh contributed to criminal law and the rights of defendants?  
KRAMER:  Well, I suppose in the acquitted conduct, he is bound by the Supreme Court precedent, but he has encouraged judges, as a matter of discretion which they have, to not use acquitted conduct for sentence.   
      He is, in a number of cases, some of which I've argued, on mens rea he has reversed convictions or noted in concurrences are dissents, that he believes that people should not be convicted of certain crimes without the proper mens rea. And he's written a number of those cases.   
      So I think in both of those areas, those are important individual rights for my clients.   
HATCH:  Thank you.   
      Ms. Mahoney, you've known Judge Kavanaugh for other two decades, since both of you were in the solicitor general's office together at the Justice Department.   
      You've also appeared before him in court. Now, what kind of a jurist is he on the bench?   
MAHONEY:  Phenomenal. I I 
       
HATCH:  advantage, because you had served with him before?   
MAHONEY:  No, no. I I'm sure it wasn't an advantage.   
HATCH:  What's the matter with him?   
MAHONEY:  Yeah, right. I'm sure it wasn't an advantage. He is extremely careful about his work. And one of the harder hardest working judges out there. And that's the way he was in the solicitor general's office too. He's kind of renowned for his work ethic, for trying to find an answer in the case. And I think he believes that, if you look long enough and hard enough, in most cases, the answer's going to come, and it's just a product of doing the work.  
HATCH:  Well, that's great. How many other lawyers have worked with Judge Kavanaugh or argued cases before him? You know many of them on  
MAHONEY:  I - I don't - I - I know most of the Appellate Bar in Washington D.C. Many of them have argued before him, many of them know him from working with him, either in the White House  
HATCH:  What are - what are their opinions?  
MAHONEY:  I don't know anyone who doesn't put Judge Kavanaugh in just the highest category they can come up with. He is - he's - he's remarkable and people really adore him. I will tell you that, you know, around Washington, at least in my world, when people were debating who would be appointed to the Supreme Court when Justice Kennedy retired, the answer from almost everybody that I talked to was, "Well, it ought to be Brett Kavanaugh."   
      So I mean this was - you know, this is the Supreme Court Bar and the Appellate Bar in the Washington D.C. area, but there is just really deep uniform respect for him, as a jurist and as a man.  
HATCH:  Everybody I know who knows him speaks very glowingly of him  
MAHONEY:  Glowingly.  
HATCH:  just like you.  
MAHONEY:  Uniformly, glowingly.  
HATCH:  Well, it seems to me he is precisely the type of person we want on the bench.  
MAHONEY:  It would be a travesty if he doesn't get 100 votes.   
HATCH:  Well, now you've - you've put a lot of pressure  
MAHONEY:  There you go. Just - just do that  
HATCH:  Keep it up, I - I appreciate that.  
MAHONEY:  All right.  
HATCH:  We're happy to have all of you here. This is very important, and you're testimony will be given serious attention. Let's - who's next on this?  
HATCH:  Senator Blumenthal, you're next.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Thank you, Senator Hatch. I want to join in thanking all of you for being here. This is another great panel. I want to join my colleague, Senator Whitehouse, who very eloquently and powerfully thanked Eastmond and Jackson Corbin and Hunter LaChance. You have really shown us how an individual voice can make such a difference.  
      But I also want to thank Melissa Smith for your comments on how a collective voice can be impactful, and a lot of young people would not have their individual voices. But for your service as a teacher, I've always thought that being a teacher, along with being police, firefighter, emergency responders, you are the unsung hero's, our public service employees.   
      I want to thank you for your personal testimony about the importance of - of the issues that matter in real lives to real people and have real impact.  
SMITH:  Thank you.  
BLUMENTHAL:  And I want to ask Aalayah Eastmond, since we've talked about real people and real lives. You know, in Connecticut, we had - we had a tragedy similar to the one you experienced. And I live through an afternoon and then a week, similar to what you did in Parkland, not the same first-hand experience that you did, but I saw the impact on loved ones and children and parents and teachers as you did. And I saw the impact on moms and dads like Fred Guttenerg, who was here earlier in the week, as you know, and you commented in your testimony about him. If I were Judge Kavanaugh, who as you know said that assault weapons should not be banned cannot be banned under the Second Amendment of the Constitution, what would you say to him?   
EASTMOND:  That my life along with all the other youth is more important than that gun.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And if he said to you, you know there is this legal principle that says unless there was a ban or one analogous to it at the time of our Constitution or traditionally in our law, what would say about the real impact of that kind of assault weapon your life?   
EASTMOND:  Yes, it's unimaginable. The shooter at my school shot 34 kids under six minutes. And that gun ended 17 lives on February 14. That gun ended lives at Sandy Hook. That gun ended lives all over the country and there's mass shootings that happen almost every month. And I believe that that gun needs to be banned any assault rifle. And he needs to listen to us because our lives are just as important as any American's freedom to own a gun.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Well, I hope that Judge Kavanaugh is listening to you. Thank you very much.    
LEE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks so much to all of you for being here. My friend and colleague, Senator Kennedy from Louisiana had to step out for a few minutes. Wasn't sure whether he'll be back in time but he asked me to convey to you his gratitude to each of you for your testimony and your willingness to provide insights. Ms. Mahoney, I'd like to start with you. I heard mention a minute ago speculation about unfair advantage in court.   
      And Senator Hatch, I can I can tell you she always has an unfair advantage in court because she's so good. You've always been one of my favorite litigators to watch argue cases in the Supreme Court. It's an odd little hobby of mine, watching Supreme Court litigants, and always enjoyed you arguing. One of the things I've appreciated about your arguments is that you focus on the law. You focus on what why your client's case is right and you focus you seem to have an approach that echoes something that you said a minute ago, which is that if you're willing to go to the hard work of finding the right answer in a case, you can find the right answer.   
      The law will normally supply the correct answer. And you seem to believe that Judge Kavanaugh shares this view. Tell me how that can help instill a sense of civility among members of the bar and among jurists, the belief that there is a right answer in the law.   
MAHONEY:  I I think think there is a right answer in the law. I think he believes that and it and it should instill a sense of confidence in the judiciary because there is sort of this pervasive view that the justices are it's becoming more pervasive, that the justices are just partisans, you know, deciding for their team. And and I certainly don't believe that's the case. I don't think that's what's going on. There are different ideologies but I don't think it's partisanship.   
      And I think that Justice Kavanaugh Judge Kavanaugh, Justice Kavanaugh, hopefully, will perform his role in a way that people will understand that he is just working to get the answer. The way he asks questions the way he probes evenly, the way he shows respect for for everyone and the way he explains his decisions and the way he surprises people sometimes with the way that he rules. You won't be happy Republicans won't be happy every time, Democrats won't be happy every time but it will be a product of his reasoning and his effort and his work in the case. And and I think Americans should be grateful for that kind of judicial approach, whether they're Republicans or Democrats and I would hope that we could get beyond some of this polarization.   
LEE:  As someone who's devoted her career to arguing in front of the Supreme Court, you can confirm that there is no aisle there's no political aisle   
MAHONEY:  There is no personal political aisle. No, there is not.   
LEE:  And in fact, five to four decisions are very rare.   
MAHONEY:  They're very rare. Yes they are.   
LEE:  Ms. Taibleson, I I appreciated your comments. I I having served as a as a clerk myself, I know that there's a special bond, a relationship that develops between a law clerk and the the judge or justice for whom the the law clerk is working. One of the reasons for that is you're able to interact with the jurist on a day-to-day basis, not only in seeing, in in your case, how Judge Kavanaugh interacted with his law clerks, but also how he interacted with his colleagues. What can you tell us about what you saw and what how that would portend for how he would interact with colleagues regardless of their backgrounds and regardless of what some people might identify as their political ideologies?   
TAIBLESON:  Certainly, Senator. The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals is composed of many judges who have diverse views on the law and on judicial philosophies more generally. But at least when I was there, their views of Judge Kavanaugh are not diverse. Instead, they uniformly respect him, they appreciate his collegiality, his ability, his hard work and ultimately the fact that he's a straight-shooter.   
      He there are certainly always going to be disagreements but those are disagreements that he has in good faith. There's no hidden agenda, nothing like that. He says what he means and he means what he says. I think on the Supreme Court he is going to bring those same characteristics and I think he's going to be sort of a uniter for that reason. I think he's going to bring out the best in his fellow justices should he be fortunate enough to be confirmed and is going to have great relationships with justices across the ideological spectrum.   
LEE:  Thank you. Ms. Smith, I have great respect for teachers. Both my parents worked as educators in different capacities at different points in their careers and they always taught me to have great respect for my teachers, especially social studies teachers because of the importance of the subject matter you teach. Can you help help me understand I understand that resources are are scarce and resources more resources often need to be devoted to public education to make sure that you as a teacher and your colleagues, those with whom you work have the capacity to do your job, to educate people.   
      Help me understand the connection between your concern for those resources and the jurisprudential philosophy of this federal judge.   
SMITH:  One of my biggest concerns is his positions on public school vouchers, taking money from public education to give a few select people some some choice takes money from us to fund someone else's education. We will be left in my district with the majority of of our of our same students with less funding than we have now. So   
LEE:  But when you say his position, you don't mean his policy position, because he's acting not as a policymaker but as a jurist deciding on whether or not something is lawful. Deciding whether or not the policymakers are empowered to make that decision.   
SMITH:  Right, I understand that   
LEE:  Isn't that isn't there a difference between those two things?   
SMITH:  Yes and no. We often believe that that our whether they be elected officials or judges are not supposed to bring their personal views into it and only base decisions on the laws but it doesn't always seem like that's the case. Maybe not with Judge Kavanaugh but there's always a concern that personal views will influence judgment. That's a concern that that teachers have, that students have. And when he had publicly spoken in support of public school vouchers, that's a concern that we have.   
LEE:  I see my time's expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   
GRASSLEY:  Thank you. Senator Booker.   
BOOKER:  I didn't mind if he kept going. I I I didn't want to I know I'm the last person, I think, sir.   
GRASSLEY:  Well, we got another panel waiting.   
BOOKER:  Oh, you have another panel. I apologize.   
GRASSLEY:  Yes.   
BOOKER:  OK. First of all, I just want to thank all the panelists for coming. I really do appreciate you participating in this process and it's it's extraordinarily helpful. Allayah, your testimony was really heartbreaking and painful to listen to but the poise with which you spoke of something that I know is horrific and unimaginable was extraordinary.   
EASTMOND:  Thank you.   
BOOKER:  Extraordinary. And and there are specific policy things that you are advocating for. I know, I've met with lots of the students from Parkland. And I'm just wondering if you just give you another opportunity, just because I think you are extraordinarily eloquent speaker. But but are there any particular policy issues that you all are advocating for that you can maybe speak to in a little more detail about what you'd like to see and how that relates to a Supreme Court justice?   
EASTMOND:  Yes. Right now we're focusing on an assault weapons ban because they are just unnecessary. Next year I'll be 18 and I could go get an assault rifle. Like why would I need that. And also high-capacity magazines. We want those gone, too. And also my focus, I really want people from the Congress to focus on the youth from black and brown communities because that's often the elephant in the room that nobody wants to talk about and their lives are being taken away every single day.   
      So I think focusing on the entire spectrum of gun violence and not only mass shootings, but the shootings that happen every day in urban urban communities are just as important.   
BOOKER:  And I guess that's what spoke to me a lot because I live in a community with a a lot of even though my incredible mayor has done a lot to lower the the the shootings in my city, we still have a lot. I've had one on my block just this year where someone was murdered with an assault weapon at the top of the hill where I live. And I appreciate your your concerns about that and your advocacy extraordinary and I think that for you and the other young people on this panel, you should know in many ways your voices can be more powerful than any adult.   
      And I just really want to thank everybody all the three of you for being there. Mr. Kramer, you said that generally you agree with me on criminal justice issues?   
KRAMER:  Yes.   
BOOKER:  That's all I wanted to hear. No, no, sir, in all   
KRAMER:  That's good enough for me.   
BOOKER:  Good enough for me as well. No, sir, the the could you just give me that under I tried to make a point yesterday about the balance of power shifting in America in American law. I mean, we we seem to have a a right to a jury but that seems to me and this I'm not saying you should agree with me on this, I just want to hear your real opinion on it. It's really shifting dramatically because in a plea bargain, which is not really a fair bargain, but now prosecutors have a lot more of a of a threat of jeopardy to offer to offer that makes often people take a plea bargain because they're too afraid of going to trial.   
      And when they go do go to the trial, the chances for success are pretty are pretty low. And and I know that if criminal public defenders often will let people know what the reality is. Is that is that shift in our American criminal justice happening?   
KRAMER:  Senator Booker, that's a great question. And absolutely. I think you know the statistics over 97 percent of the cases in federal court pleaded guilty last year and similar statistics in state court.   
      And I would not call it a plea bargain. I would call it a plea imposition. The terms are given, you take it because and, you absolutely right about mandatory minimum sentences skewing the power in the system. It's all in the prosecutor's hands.   
      I've been around for a long time and seen a huge power shift as a result of sentencing guidelines, mandatory minimums and just draconian sentences, especially of people of color it's affected disproportionally. And so, yes, you're absolutely right. There's been a huge shift.  
BOOKER:  Right. And that's the painful thing for me is I see young kids getting caught up for drug crimes that kids in privileged communities, you know I, too, went to Yale, I went to Stanford; lots of drugs. I will not make any personal confessions right now, but lots of drugs.   
      And and so, here are kids getting charges for doing things that two of the last three presidents admitted to doing. And then they're presented with a plea. I've had young kids sit in my office and say, look, I was terrified. Facing 10 years stacked mandatory minimums. This guy told me I can get out right now. And then I end up with a then I end up with a criminal conviction. But they don't realize it's a lifetime sentence.  
      And and so, I guess, just can you make this point for me that this idea to a right to a jury trial, that's kind of being eroded in the United States of America, would would you agree with me?  
KRAMER:  I I would call it a disappearing right, Senator Booker. And also, I think you're absolutely right and, since you don't make any confessions, I don't feel I have to make any either 
BOOKER:  You could 
KRAMER:  But 
BOOKER:  I appreciate that.  
KRAMER:  but, you're right. There's you were talking about the neighborhoods. There are tactics in various neighborhoods that if they were engaged in, in other neighborhoods in the cities or suburbs, that would just be the the they would not be tolerated by the population there, but because of a powerless population in the neighborhoods where it does occur.   
      And so you're right on both points about the tactics that occur in various neighborhoods. And you're absolutely right about the disappearance of the of the jury trial.  
BOOKER:  OK, thank you. And my time's expired. I just want to say something to Mr. Christmas. Because I've met Mr. Christmas and I know have previous we've met each other before.   
      And and I just want to testify to your character because it's a you said something that was he said something that was really, I think, really important about the partisanship and the tribalism often. And how friendships are tested, that you were speaking to what you know of him as a friend, not as a as a judge but as a as a friend.  
      And I want to appreciate that. And I I want to make an open offer for you because you said you stopped playing basketball because of your age. The Senate has a basketball game. And I promise you, there are age-appropriate of of us that that can play. And you probably would be like Michael Jordan if you came and played amongst us.  
CHRISTMAS:  I'll do my best.  
BOOKER:  All right. Thank you, sir.  
GRASSLEY:  We have two things left for this panel. Senator Kennedy, you wanted some time? And then, senator well, now we'll have we'll  
WHITEHOUSE:  Three.  
GRASSLEY:  I guess we're going to have Senator Hirono, too. Go ahead, Senator Kennedy.  
KENNEDY:  I had to step out for a few minutes. But I'd I I'd heard your testimony, each of you. And I just want to thank you for it. And I know you each spent a lot of time putting the testimony together. This stuff doesn't just write itself.  
      I I was mentioned to the earlier panel, I I I enjoy this this immensely. I learn a lot from listening to your different perspectives. And I just want to thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Hirono doesn't want to be recognized?  
HIRONO:  Mr. Chairman, I have questions for the next panel. But  
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
HIRONO:  I certainly thank this panel for being here.  
GRASSLEY:  Yes. I'm for courtesy to the ranking member; he wants to speak for a minute to some people on the panel.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to make one point because there's so much discussion about mens rea. And I just wanted to provide what I see as some context for this.   
      I've read Judge Kavanaugh's decisions on mens rea, which have focused, so far, on individual defendants and, very often, individual defendants who faced very significant terms of incarceration. And I see no objection whatsoever in any of the decisions that I've read of his.   
      I have also been at the center of the effort to try to negotiate a sentencing and re-entry reform package, along with Senator Cornyn, and Senator Grassley, and Senator Booker, and Senator Lee and others. And as we did that, what began to pop up and, what popped up through big industry-funded groups was a late-arriving desire to reform mens rea.   
      And the obvious motive for that is a a group of offenses, a category of offenses that are called public welfare offenses. And those are offenses in which we say particularly about a dangerous instrumentality like a pollutant, or benzene, or dynamite or something like that that, at some point, if you're a big corporation and something really goes wrong, you spill your 10,000th barrel, that's a crime. And we don't care what your mens rea, what your degree of intent is.  
      Your job, as a big corporation that pollutes or has dangerous things, is to make sure that doesn't happen. That's why we put that marker out there. And it's a very well established type of criminal conduct, is it not, Mr. Kramer?  
KRAMER:  Yes, absolutely. Public regulatory offenses like that, there are they are there's a number of them that, right, that have no mens rea requirement.  
WHITEHOUSE:  And my worry, and I'll just put this out, this is there is a marker, and this will be telling if it happens, is if this body of precedent that Judge Kavanaugh is building up with respect to individual defendants who face significant terms of incarceration all of a sudden has a very big morph and suddenly becomes the basis for an attack on these public welfare offenses.  
      I've seen that maneuver begin to happen in Congress. And if it starts to happen in the courts, to me at least, that will be another telling sign of the big influencers and interests that operate so much of what happens in our court systems coming in to seize a prize. And I hope that we don't go there.  
KRAMER:  Did you want me to respond, or 
WHITEHOUSE:  If he could comment briefly? I don't want to.  
GRASSLEY:  No, you 
WHITEHOUSE:  Go ahead and respond briefly.  
KRAMER:  The only thing I can say, and and I I know exactly what you're talking about, is that Judge Kavanaugh, the opinions he's written are in cases that have a mens rea requirement, knowing willfully. And I have never seen him write that it should be extended to public with he's in in other words, he's going with the will of Congress in what Congress enacted. And I have never seen him take that step in an opinion of 
WHITEHOUSE:  I hope he never does.  
KRAMER:  of of a case of a crime without a mens rea requirement.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. Once again, even though I thanked you once, we know that you go to a lot of work to do this for the people of this country and the Senate in the consideration of this nomination. Thank you very much. And you're dismissed.  
      All right, Cory.   
        
      Come on, Buchar.   
        
      Would the people of the second panel or the the last panel come to the table, please?   
      Before I introduce the next panel and swear the next panel, I want to take the opportunity to give appreciation from the chairman on the committee for our all the staff work that goes into this, and I'm been fortunate as a senator to have an outstanding staff over many years, and I hope they know how much I appreciate them, both committee staff and personal office.   
      Before closing this hearing today, I'd like to name staffers specifically assigned to work on this nomination hearing. Some are my permanent staff, led by Chief Counsel for Nominations, Mike Davis, and including Lauren Mailer, Steve Kennedy, Jessica Veau, and Katherine Willie.   
      And then others are here only temporarily because we get additional resources when we have a Supreme Court nominee. So I want to name them and say thank you for their extraordinary work and commitment to public service. The special counsels added specifically for this Supreme Court nominee, whom are led by Andrew Ferguson, and included Tyler Badgely, Lucas Kroslow, Colleen Ernst, Megan McGlenn, and Colin White.   
      The law clerks were Camille Peebles, Abby Holenstein, Tim Rodriguez, Dario Comancho, Elizabeth Donald, Bob Minchen, Nathan Williams, Sam Atkisson, Nick Gallagher, Michael Talent, Asher Perez, Garrett Ventry, as did Jacob Reimer as an intern. So I thank the legal team for their important part in the Senate's consideration of Judge Kavanaugh.   
      I think before I introduce you, I would ask that you stand so I can swear you, please.   
      Do you swear that the testimony you you're about the give before this committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth so help you God?   
      Thank you all very much. I know a lot of you here, names I recognize, you're famous around town and famous in history, so I probably won't do justice to your to your introduction.   
      Monica Mastal is a real estate agent, Washington, D.C. She's known Judge Kavanaugh for 25 years.   
      John Dean, who I've known not as a person, but I've known since before I even got to Congress by his reputation. Served as Richard Nixon's White House Counsel from 1970 to 1973.   
      And then of course, a famous lawyer, Paul Clement, who's a partner of Kirk Kirkland and and Ellis, served as Solicitor General of the United States, 2005 to 2008, and has argued over 90 cases before the Supreme Court. Judge Kavanaugh and Mr. Clement clerked at the same time on the Supreme Court, Judge Kavanaugh clerked for Justice Kennedy and the justices whose big shoes Judge Kavanaugh is nominated to fill, when Mr. Clement clerked for the late Justice Scalia.   
      Professor Rebecca Ingber I hope that's right is an Assistant Professor of Law, Boston University School of Law.   
      Professor Adam White has had me on panels with an organization he's with, and he's also from Iowa, but not not right now from Iowa, but was born in Dubuque, Iowa. By the way, I talked about you in my opening statement this morning.   
      Senator Professor Adam White is an Assistant Professor at George Mason's Scalia Law School, and is the Executive Director of C. Boyden Gray Center for the Study of the Administrative State. He is also a research fellow at the Hoover Institution and member of the Administrative Conference of the United States, and also I had a chance to meet your parents about an hour ago, and they're out came out just especially for you.   
      Professor Lisa Heinzerling is that right is the Justice William J. Brennan Jr. Professor of Law at Georgetown University Law Center.   
      Professor Jennifer Mascott served as a law clerk for Judge Kavanaugh from 2006 to 2007, and went on to clerk for Justice Clarence Thomas, Supreme Court. She's an assistant professor law at George Mason Scalia Law School and is of consul to the law firm Consovoy . McCarthy Park. Professor Peter Shane is Jacob E. Davison Jacob E. Davis II chair in law at the Ohio State University Moritz College of Law. So will you proceed, Ms. Mastal?   
MASTAL:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member, Whitehouse and members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, I am honored to be here today to address you in support of my friend and my daughter's favorite coach, the Honorable Brett Cavanaugh. My testimony today will not be from a legal perspective but from a personal and parental perspective. Consider it more about the person than the nominee.   
      I have known Judge Kavanaugh for many years, but in recent years have seen him on a regular basis thanks to his position as the coach of the CYO girls fifth and sixth grade basketball team at Blessed Sacrament school. In our house he is not known as Judge Kavanaugh but as Coach K. He was my daughter's coach for two years. Our first year, his daughter was in fourth grade and therefore ineligible for the team. He still coached. In my book, that alone qualifies him for sainthood.   
      As a high school and college player, Coach K had the job prerequisite of basketball knowledge. More importantly, however, he had the other necessary attributes of patience, fairness and diplomacy. And he had them in spades. Fairness with young players and opposing teams, patience with boisterous parents and diplomacy with referees who were on their fifth game of the day and making some questionable calls. In the few hours a week of practices and games, Judge Kavanaugh teaches much more than the fundamentals of basketball.   
      All of the other important concepts were there too. Teamwork, hard work, commitment, setting and achieving goals and striving to be your best. It is an enormous task to communicate all of that to young girls in so little time but his calm demeanor got the message across. No yelling or gavel was necessary. Of course the Kavanaugh's contribution to our community extends beyond basketball. School auctions, food drives and service projects are abundant at Blessed Sacrament and Brett and Ashley are always there to participate.   
      This leads me to another personal perspective. Brett is relatable to everyday Americans. In the public eye, Supreme Court justices are strictly cerebral, ethical, humble and courageous. He is all of those things, but I am one of the everyday Americans who sees him getting his children to practice, managing four games a weekend, serving as electorate church, running on the high school track and socializing with friends.   
      As my final note today, I would like to read Coach Kavanaugh's final note to my daughter from his end of the season player evaluation. I share this with the utmost confidence that every player on the team received the same honest, appreciative, supportive, heartfelt and confidence-building message. It stated, thanks, Mary Grace. You are an excellent athlete and were a great contributor to the team.   
      We loved your spirit and attitude. We really enjoyed coaching you and wish you all the best. We look forward to having you on the team next year. Keep up your great spirit, attitude and work ethic and you will be a big success in all you do. It kind of makes me want to go back to fifth grade basketball. Thank you for the opportunity to share this personal perspective. As the great UCLA basketball coach John Wooden said, young people need models, not critics. I think this final note says it all as to the model Coach Kavanaugh has been to our children.   
      I know the parents of his players feel as fortunate as I do that our girls had such a wonderful mentor. Through basketball, he taught them the skills they will need not only for a season but for a lifetime. Thank you.   
GRASSLEY:  Mr. Dean.   
DEAN:  Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, members of the committee, thank you for the invitation. In my allotted time, I'd like to take a few points from the statement I've submitted for the record. I've made two overriding points in that submitted statement. First, if Judge Kavanaugh joins the court, it will be the most presidential powers friendly court in the modern era. Republicans and conservatives only a few years ago I know well fought the expansion of presidential power and executive powers.   
      That's no longer true. Judge Kavanaugh has a very broad view of presidential powers. For example, he would have the Congress immunize sitting presidents from both civil and criminal liability. Under Judge Kavanaugh's recommendation, if a president shot somebody in cold blood on Fifth Avenue, that president cannot be prosecuted while in office. Also, it's not clear to me listening to the testimony, that he really believes Nixon U.S. versus Nixon was correctly decided.   
      A second general point from my submission. A very vital, I think, process point. Ranking Member Diane Feinstein stated on the morning of September 4, just before the hearings opened, that after participating in nine Supreme Court confirmations, it had never been so difficult to get access to background documents relating to a nominee as in the current proceedings. Unsuccessfully the minority sought to postpone these hearings until all the requested documents were provided.   
      The chair, however, declined to consider the motion that would make review possible. This committee is deeply involved in the final phase of vetting Supreme Court nominees. Based on personal experiences with the confirmation, for example, of William Rehnquist and studying the confirmation of Clarence Thomas, it's clear there was an across-the-board failure to fully vet the nominees and it has haunted their careers on the court, it's hurt the court and the American people.   
      Because of the withholding of documents, Judge Kavanaugh may be traveling the same path as Rehnquist and Thomas. When writing a book that I did several years ago, "The Rehnquist Choice", I explained how Rehnquist was selected by Nixon as one of the two for two openings that occurred in 1971. I also reported my sad discovering that Rehnquist has dissembled during his confirmation proceedings.   
      He did, however, notwithstanding false statements, become an associate justice. When Ronald Reagan nominated him to be chief justice in in 1986, again he was not vetted and there in those hearings he was confronted not only with his earlier false statements but new material that resulted in new false statements. All the court historians that I've examined and court scholars find clear and convincing evidence that Mr. Rehnquist lied in his two confirmation proceedings. This hurt him and it hurt the court. Because Justice Thomas was not fully vetted, his career on the court has been under a cloud as well.   
      Thomas's truthfulness vis-a-vis Professor Anita Hill's claims of sexual harassment have never been fully resolved, nor has the controversy ever ended. A definitive study of this controversy was undertaken in 1994 by journalists Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson, "Strange Justice:  The Selling of Clarence Thomas". They found a preponderance of evidence supported Anita Hill's claims.   
      This controversy has received renewed attention with the #MeToo movement, which is growing stronger and it's not going to disappear. In fact, Justice Thomas's truthfulness is an issue in this year's midterm election. A Democratic candidate in Massachusetts has made impeachment of Thomas for his false claims during his confirmation one of the planks of her campaign. In closing, Judge Kavanaugh's nomination has raised issues about the truthfulness in confirmation become a judge of the D.C. circuit.   
      His answers to this committee have not resolved the issue. Frankly, I'm surprised that Judge Kavanaugh is not demanding that every document that he's ever handled be reviewed by this committee. Unless of course there's something to hide.   
        
GRASSLEY:  Mr. Clement.   
CLEMENT:  Thank you, Chairman Grassley, Senator Whitehouse and members of the committee. It's a great pleasure and honor to return to the Senate Judiciary Committee where I served as a staffer some two decades ago. It is an even greater pleasure and honor to be here today to testify in support of Judge Kavanaugh's nomination to the Supreme Court of the United States. Judge Kavanaugh and I first met some 25 years ago when the clerked at the Supreme Court together during the same term for different justices.   
      Although the law clerks were an impressive bunch, Brett immediately stood out. Unlike most of the rest of us whose legal experience consisted of a single appellate clerkship, Brett came to his Supreme Court clerkship with two clerkships under his belt already on the ninth and third circuits and he had also served as a Bristow fellow in the office of the solicitor general where he spent a year following the court closely and working on briefs and oppositions and other Supreme Court filings.   
      As a result, while the rest of us were feeling our way rather blindly through the process of preparing our first pull memos in sorting through our first sets of briefs, Brett was already fully versed in the courts, certiorari criteria, rules, and even stood ready to handicap the likely quality of upcoming oral arguments by members of the Supreme Court bar. Brett quickly came to be seen by his fellow law clerks as a resource on everything from the minutia of Supreme Court practice to matters of high constitutional doctrine.   
      But what really stood out about Brett was not just his knowledge of the court and the law but the undeniable fact that he was a well-rounded, likable and unpretentious person. You expect a Supreme Court law clerk to have a first rate legal mind. You do not necessarily expect a Supreme Court law clerk to have a sweet jumps hot. I can tell you from first-hand experience that Brett had both.   
      He was as comfortable talking about how to break a full court press as he was discussing the Rooker-Feldman doctrine. For all these reasons, Brett was admired by fellow clerks from all chambers and across ideological lines. None of us was the least surprised to see him become the first of our ranks to argue Supreme Court case and the first to become a federal appellate court judge, beating out Judge Justice Gorsuch by a nose.   
Judge Kavanaugh and I became friends during our clerkship year and have remained friends ever since. But I am not here today testifying out of friendship. Rather, I am testifying today because of what I have seen in observing Judge Kavanaugh in his over 12 years of service on the federal appellate bench.   
      By happenstance, I was in the courtroom to witness one of Judge Kavanaugh's first oral arguments as an appellate judge. He was incredibly well-prepared. He demonstrated a mastery of the record and asked penetrating questions of both sides. He carefully listened to the arguing attorney's answers, as well as the questions emanating from his more seasoned colleagues.   
      None of this surprised me, but I was struck by the fact that he was expressing this mastery of the record and a profound interest in the legal arguments in the context of a petition for review from a decision of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or FERC.   
      At least in my days as a law clerk on the D.C. Circuit, FERC cases were not among the most coveted by the law clerks or the judges. FERC cases were notoriously complex, with long administrative records filled with strange acronyms and doctrines unknown in other areas of the law.   
      I feared for my friend, Judge Kavanaugh, that he would be saddled with the assignment of the FERC case while his more senior colleagues authored opinions and higher profile cases addressing more readily accessible doctrines.   
      When my fears were realized, I am quite sure that Judge Kavanaugh did not mind. As I've see in the ensuing 12 years, he approaches every case with the same thorough approach, regardless to the amount and controversy, the degree of notoriety, or the agency involved. He recognizes that each case is the most important case for the clients and lawyers involved, and treats each case accordingly.   
      Let me close with just a few words about judicial temperament. The concept has been much discussed in the course of other judicial confirmation hearings, but the topic has received less attention in the course of these particular hearings because Judge Kavanaugh has so plainly demonstrated the requisite judicial temperament over his years on the D.C. Circuit.   
      That said, I believe it is a mistake to think of judicial temperament as if it is a binary characteristic, something a judicial candidate either has or lacks. Instead, there are degrees of judicial temperament, and I'm here to tell you, based on my own experience arguing in front of Judge Kavanaugh, that Judge Kavanaugh has judicial temperament in spades.   
      He is respectful of counsel in both his demeanor and in his level of preparation and engagement. Nothing is more discourage to discouraging to litigants or their clients than a cold or underprepared bench. There is no fear of that with Judge Kavanaugh. He understands that appellate cases are serious businesses for the parties involved and prepares accordingly.   
      So I think based on my experience knowing him just as a friend and as a judicial colleague as a judicial officer, by any conventional measure, I believe he is enormously qualified to serve on the nation's highest court. I am confident he will serve with distinction, and I urge you to vote for his confirmation.   
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Mr. Clement. Now Professor Ingber.  
INGBER:  Thank you, Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Whitehouse, and distinguished committee members. It is an honor to testify before you today.   
      My name is Rebecaa Ingber. I'm an Associate Professor at the Boston University School of Law, and previously I served in the State Department Office of the Legal Advisor, where I worked with colleagues at the Departments of Justice and Defense, in the intelligence community, and at the White House on matters involving international law and way and executive power. So my testimony today will focus on Judge Kavanaugh's jurisprudence in these areas.   
Judge Kavanaugh has clearly had an exceptional career and has many obvious strengths, but I believe there are some concerns his jurisprudence raises that should be addressed before final consideration of his nomination. In particular, and as I explore in more detail in my written remarks, Judge Kavanaugh's opinions reveal that he is exceedingly reluctant to impose checks on the president's powers in the national security sphere. Now, this is not an area where Judge Kavanaugh has merely followed precedent with his hands tied.   
      To take one prominent example, in a case involving the president's authority over detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Judge Kavanaugh wrote an 87-page separate opinion to argue that the court should not look to international law to inform the president's war powers, a position that is contrary to over two centuries of settled precedent.   
      In fact, all three branches of government have long looked to international law to define war powers over the entire course of this nation's history. When Congress authorizes the president to use all necessary and appropriate force, it does so against the backdrop of that history.   
      The Supreme Court has ratified this understanding repeatedly including in opinions that looked international law both to read the president's powers expansively and to interpret the outer limits on those powers. They did just that in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld with Justice Kennedy joined which looked to international law to find that the 2001 statute authorizing the precedent to use military force also authorizes detention as well as limits on that detention.   
      And perhaps because these rules have always guided our understanding, international law is one of the only tools, the courts and the political branches have for interpreting war powers. Thus, it is often the only limiting principle for interpreting the outer bounds of the president's wartime authorities.   
      Now, I want to clarify a misconception about international law. These are not rules imposed on us by some outside source. The international laws of rule of the international laws of war, for example, are rules that we have affirmatively chosen to be bound by, specifically in wartime in which the United States, including the US military, has always played a principal role in shaping.   
      These are rules that benefit our military as well as all of us. These rules are so built into the national ethos that we may forget they derive from international law.   
      For example, we know that it is unlawful for the president to kill families of terrorism suspects. Why? Because the international laws of war prohibit the targeting of civilians and we always have interpreted the president's authority to wage war in light of those rules.   
      If the Supreme Court were to adopt Judge Kavanaugh's position on this or other areas where he has invoked national security to dismiss the court's role in checking the president, the result would be that the president could wield nearly unreviewable discretion when he invokes war or national security.   
      For my time in government, I know there's a great deal of thoughtful decision-making and robust process that happens inside the national security apparatus, but I also saw firsthand the importance of the court's role in checking presidential power even when the president invokes war or national security.   
      Mistakes happen. Bad decisions may come about through incompetence, through insufficiency of facts, exigency, and even, yes, through the intentional abuse of power. Even a robust process can lead to presidential overreach after all the premise of the separation of powers is that each branch will seek to enhance its own authority and the other branches including the courts are there to impose limits.   
      Moreover, while Judge Kavanaugh would have the courts defer broadly to the president in this area, the reality is that the executive branch looks to the courts to understand the parameters of its authority. When a judge defers broadly to the position that the government takes in court, a position taken not under the best view of the law standard, but rather that of a defensive litigant trying to win its case.   
      The court's deference often has the result of a merits decision and becomes the law for the executive branch going forward. If the courts never if the courts never push back on the governments litigation positions, the result is a one-way ratchet of expanding executive power. And because so much of executive branch decision-making in this realm happens in secret, accountability through public scrutiny alone is often insufficient. Judicial review is at times the only means of holding the president accountable.   
      For these reasons and those in my written testimony, I urge you to consider the dangers in a judicial approach that seeds to the president unreviewable discretion in this realm. Thank you for inviting me to testify today. I'd be pleased to answer any questions the Committee has.   
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Professor.   
      Now, Professor White?   
WHITE:  Thank you.   
      Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Whitehouse, Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me testify in support of Judge Kavanaugh's nomination.   
      Chairman Grassley, as you very kindly mentioned, my first education in civics and history came from the teachers in Dubuque, Iowa, in the University of Iowa. It's a real pleasure to be here today, great honor, to discuss Judge Kavanaugh's own deep appreciation for our constitution and the rule of law.   
      As exemplified by his 12 years of service in the D.C. circuit, 300+ judicial opinions and a deep record of legal scholarship, his record is particularly impressive on questions of administrative law that is the body of law that governs administrative agencies and defines the agency's relationships with Congress, with the courts, the president, and with the people.   
      In my longer written testimony, I focus on four important aspects of Judge Kavanaugh's approach to administrative law. Today, I'd like to highlight two issues in particular.   
      The first involves doctrines of judicial deference to administrative agencies legal interpretations. Not long ago, skeptics of judicial deference were found primarily on the left. Now, increasingly, judicial deference also finds critics on the right.   
      I'd like to echo a lot of Professor Ingber's comments towards the end of her testimony on the inherent challenges and problems of judicial excessive judicial deference to the executive branch, not just in matters of foreign national security but also with respect to executive regulatory agencies.   
      And throughout his time on the D.C. Circuit, Judge Kavanaugh has faithfully applied the Supreme Court's increasingly complex approach to judicial deference including Chevron deference especially in recent cases involving agencies, claiming immense new regulatory powers under the guise of decades' old statutes.   
      My second point today goes to the design of administrative agencies. From time to time, Congress has passed laws giving a certain degree of independence to the leadership of federal regulatory commissions with other officers by limiting the president's ability to fire those officers at will, making officers independent from the president raises profound constitutional questions because as Professor Amar explained this morning, the Constitution vests the president with executive power, the Constitution obligates the president to take care that the laws are faithfully executed, and when you break that link of accountability between officers and the president, you undermine both of those constitutional commitments.   
      So, on limited occasions where the Supreme Court has affirmed statutes giving regulatory commissions for other officers a measure of independence, it is done so carefully and subject to crucial limits. Judge Kavanaugh has followed those judicial precedents very carefully in cases were Congress improperly attempted to best even greater independence and newly created regulatory agencies beyond the limits previously allowed by the Supreme Court and this includes the PHH case as Professor Amar noted this morning.   
      In applying those Supreme Court precedents, Judge Kavanaugh has attracted criticism from those who would like to see administrative agencies be made even less accountable to the courts, the president, and the Congress. Now, in an era when agencies are often eager to enact policies that Congress hasn't legislated, some of Judge Kavanaugh's critics favor those energetic agencies over Congress.   
      And in a system where an elected president might disagree with the policy preferences of an administrative agency. Some of Judge Kavanaugh's critics favor making the agencies independent from the president rather than accountable to the president.   
      And in an era when administrative agencies have been increasingly eager to impose unprecedented and immense regulatory programs despite the lack of clear legislative authorization, some of Judge Kavanaugh's critics favor judges becoming more deferential agencies, not less.   
      I think Judge Kavanaugh, in applying the Supreme Court's precedents under the Constitution, has the better of these arguments. His approach, in my opinion, is to administer the law at its best, empowering agencies to administer the laws efficiently and effectively but always subject to the deeper fundamental commitments of our Constitution structure and rights.   
      For that reason, I hope that you will give your advice and consent to the appointment of Judge Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court. Thank you for this opportunity to testify.   
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Professor White.   
      Now, Professor Heinzerling?   
GRASSLEY:  Microphone? Push the red button or whatever color the button is.   
HEINZERLING:  Thank you, Chairman Grassley and Ranking Member Whitehouse for inviting me to testify here today.   
      My name is Lisa Heinzerling and I'm the Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., Professor of Law, Georgetown University. I will testify about Judge Kavanaugh's views on administrative law. They're somewhat different from the views we've just heard.   
      Administrative agencies are at the heart of administrative law. These agencies are the institutions you know by their initials. The EPA, the FDA, the FTC, the FCC, and so on. They are the institutions that do the day-to-day work of government, staffed by experts created and set in motion by Congress and subject to requirements of public input and reason-giving.   
      Administrative agencies combine expertise, politics, and deliberation in a way other institutions do not. They are responsible for everything from addressing air pollution to enforcing rules against financial fraud. They are essential to the daily business of government.   
Judge Kavanaugh would limit the ability of Congress to structure and empower administrative agencies to do this important work. He would eliminate Congress's power to provide agencies with some measure of independence from the president by protecting their top officials from being fired for political reasons.   
      He would also erase Congress's power to give agencies legal authority to deal with the most important problems we face unless Congress speaks with precise and crystalline clarity. His opinion stating these views read as if they are addressed to the administrative agencies themselves.   
      But make no mistake, Judge Kavanaugh's sites are trained on Congress and its power to structure and empower administrative agencies. Judge Kavanaugh believes that the basic problem with the structure of government today is that the president has too little power and that Congress has too much.   
Judge Kavanaugh believes that one of the constitutionally guaranteed powers of the president is the power to fire agency officials for any reason he deems sufficient even where Congress has made a different choice.   
      Yet long-standing Supreme Court precedent confirms Congress's constitutional power to create agencies that are relatively independent from the president. Judge Kavanaugh's approach to this precedent has been to treat it grudgingly and read it narrowly. Once on the Supreme Court, Judge Kavanaugh would be able to cast this precedent aside and in doing so, restructure modern government.   
      The result would be a super powerful president, a diminished Congress, and a corrosion of the checking and balancing that the Constitution contemplates. Under Judge Kavanaugh's constitutional theory, the president would be able to exercise undiluted control over all of the administrative agencies.   
      Ironically, Judge Kavanaugh has thus taken an instrument that is aimed at checking concentrated power, that is the separation of powers, and turned it into an instrument calibrated to increase the power of the already most powerful person in the government.   
Judge Kavanaugh also has a cramped view of Congress's power to delegate crucial jobs to administrative agencies. He has indicated that his preference would be to discard or drop drastically pair back longstanding precedent giving agencies deference when they interpret statutes that Congress has charged them with implementing.   
      The result would be uncertainty and disruption as agencies, citizens, and courts adjusted to a wholly new approach to statutory interpretation. Even more damaging, however, is Judge Kavanaugh's view that Congress may not empower an agency to issue a major role that is a rule that has great political and economic significance without giving the agency a precise and crystal-clear instruction to that effect.   
      This interpretive approach would perversely disable agencies in the very circumstances in which we need them the most. It would skew statutory interpretation against the agency's power to undertake protective regulatory programs that run counter to Judge Kavanaugh's own political preferences and it demands a legislative clarity that Judge Kavanaugh himself has said is difficult to achieve.   
      Worst of all, it is quite clear that Judge Kavanaugh would apply his strict new principle of interpretation only to affirmative regulatory initiatives and not to deregulation or failure to regulate. This is not a neutral principle.   
Judge Kavanaugh often says that his motivating force is the protection of individual liberty, but the liberty Judge Kavanaugh embraces his badly skewed and terribly small. It is the liberty of powerful groups to do their business unhindered by government rather than the liberty that comes from meaningful government protections against harmful human behavior.   
      In the name of liberty, Judge Kavanaugh's rejected rules addressing toxic air pollution, climate change, workplace safety, and financial fraud without acknowledging that in such cases liberty sits on both sides of the legal question. There is on one side, the liberty of regulated groups to go about their business unimpeded by federal law, there is on the other, the liberty of the rest of us to go about our lives at home, at work, at school, and in our communities with a reasonable assurance that the government has our back and protecting us against coming to harm at other people's hands.   
      Thank you.   
GRASSLEY:  Thank you, Professor.   
      Now, Professor Mascott?   
MASCOTT:  Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Whitehouse, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I'm honored to speak in support of my mentor and former boss, Judge Kavanaugh, and to share with you why I believe he'd be an outstanding Supreme Court Justice.   
      So, my testimony will highlight three aspects of Judge Kavanaugh's character and judicial service. First, his commitment to mentor ship and consideration of diverse perspectives. Next, his fair-minded and careful consideration of legal questions. And then finally, his commitment to following the law independent of personal policy preferences.   
      These are qualities that I've witnessed firsthand as Judge Kavanaugh's law clerk and then as a student of his opinions over the years. I served as a law clerk to Judge Kavanaugh during his first year on the bench. And already at that time, Judge Kavanaugh demonstrated a commitment to seeking out diverse perspectives.   
      Our group of four clerks came from different parts of the country, had diverse racial backgrounds, grew up among distinct religious traditions, and graduated from Ivy League as well as non-Ivy League law schools. Judge Kavanaugh's decision to hire our group of clerk showed his value for perspectives of people from different walks of life and the judge values hard work achievement and determination, not any specific pedigree.   
      We routinely had lively discussions in the judges' chambers as he prepared each month for oral arguments. The judge encouraged us to ask tough questions of him as he prepared and to debate legal issues with him and with each other. The judge wanted to hear and consider all sides of an issue, apply the law fairly, and help train us to bring more rigor and precision to our legal analysis, skills that have stayed with me throughout my career so far, and now as a law professor, I view it as part of my job to pass along those skills to another generation of students.   
      In addition to training us professionally, the judge also mentored us on a more personal level. We had regular lunches with the judge where we discuss our families, our professional aspirations, sports. Judge and Mrs. Kavanaugh had us in their home for dinner during the holiday season, a tradition that continued for many years.   
      And Judge Kavanaugh's devotion to training and mentoring female and male leaders in the legal profession does not conclude at the end of a clerkship in his chambers. He's remained a close mentor to me, providing an advice at every major point in my career since the end of my clerkship more than 11 years ago.   
      And Judge Kavanaugh also branches out to assist young lawyers far beyond the four corners of his clerk community. He presides over student moot court proceedings. He speaks to student associations and regularly teaches courses to students in law school campuses.   
Judge Kavanaugh's record of mentoring young lawyers and his practice of hiring law clerks with diverse life experiences demonstrate his commitment to giving back to the legal profession and showed that he has an open mind. Judge Kavanaugh knows the impact that members of the judiciary can have on the legal profession, the state of the law, and individuals in the real world.   
      Judge has taken oath to decide cases according to the law and the Constitution, the care for people in the legal system in its entirety can make a juror more careful, modest, and awful judge.   
Judge Kavanaugh's determination to consider all relevant issues and hear discussions from all sides also shows his humility and his commitment to equal justice under the law. During my clerkship, he approached each case with the same level of care regardless of the identity of the litigants with the legal issues presented. He considered all relevant statutes precedent in history and he was conscientious in writing his opinions.   
      He'd worked through scores of drafts wanting his opinions to be precise, clearly written, and accessible to litigants in the public. In the years since clerking for the judge, I've become a professor who teaches and writes in the areas of administrative law and the constitutional separation of powers and serving as a clerk for Judge Kavanaugh prepared me to analyze issues rigorously, write carefully, consider all sides of an issue.   
Judge Kavanaugh's fair application of the law, his mentorship of young lawyers, and his commitment to constitutional principles and an independent judiciary, demonstrate, I believe, that he'd be an excellent Supreme Court Justice and I strongly support his confirmation. Thank you.   
      Professor Shane?   
      Thank you, Professor Mascott.   
SHANE:  Thank you.   
      Chairman Grassley, Senator, Whitehouse, and distinguished Committee Members, thank you for the opportunity to address you today. This committee's consideration of any potential Supreme Court justice inevitably immerses you in profound constitutional issues. No issue before you now is more important than Judge Brett Kavanaugh's approach to questions of presidential power and accountability.   
      One straightforward constitutional principle frames any sound analysis of these questions. That principle is that no one, including the president, is above the law. My concern is that Judge Kavanaugh, both on and off the bench, has preceded for extreme interpretation of the president's constitutional powers that could effectively undermine the president's accountability to law into this Congress. It is by no means that view is historically associated with conservative constitutionalism.   
      In the coming years, the Supreme Court may face a host of issues testing the justices' commitment to a presidency subject to effective checks and balances. Some issues may arise because our president and some of his closest associates stand at the center of an ongoing investigation of an election campaign tainted by covert foreign involvement in multiple potential crimes.   
      Some issues already emerged because this president has refused to distance the performance of his public duties from those commercial activities that enriches private fortunes. Let me list some of these questions for you.   
      One is whether a president is potentially liable for obstruction of justice if he, and I'm quoting to statute, corruptly endeavors to influence obstruct or impede the due and proper administration of the law," unquote, through an official act. The president's lawyers saw no which is almost certainly both wrong and dangerous.   
      Another is whether president may relieve himself of criminal liability through self-pardon. A power that President Trump has said he absolutely has.   
      A third is whether an incumbent president may be indicted while in office. A fourth issue is whether Congress or a court may subpoena presidential records and even presidential testimony in connection with investigations into the 2016 campaign.   
      A fifth is whether a president is constitutionally entitled to personally direct the activities of all federal criminal prosecutors including special counsel Robert Mueller.   
      With regard to the president's business dealings, a case is already underway concerning the president's attempt to exempt himself from the reach of the constitutions emoluments clauses. The president takes the position that unless a payment is made to him personally for services rendered, the profits he pockets from foreign and state governments patronizing his properties are not the business of this Congress.   
      I'm fearful of Judge Kavanaugh refereeing these questions for three reasons. First, he explicitly adheres to the tenets of the theory of the Constitution called unitary executive theory. This extreme theory could give the president total control over the actions and decisions of any executive branch official.   
      If it became law, Congress would be unable, for example, to enact statutory limits on the scope of presidential supervisory power or an independent prosecutor. Is a theory subversive of effective checks and balances which misreads our constitutional history in which the Supreme Court has so far wisely rejected?   
      Second, Judge Kavanaugh's service in the George W. Bush White House coincided with that administration's advocacy of a host of dangerous and unprecedented claims for the reach of presidential power during his first six years in office, President Bush raised nearly 1,400 constitutional reservations regarding roughly 1,000 provisions of over 100 statutes, more objections, more than three times the total number of objections raised by his 42 predecessors combined.   
      After Judge Kavanaugh left his role as Staff Secretary, the pace of Bush signing statements slacked off. This fact raises the question to what degree Judge Kavanaugh was responsible for urging unfounded claims of presidential power.   
      Finally, while on the bench, Judge Kavanaugh has approached issues of executive power within advocates agenda. His most important opinions on the D.C. Circuit rooted in unitary executive theory appear in cases where the court had no need to reach constitutional issues at all.   
      He has shown himself going to craft constitutional doctrine from whole cloth in order to advance his pre-commitment to extreme presidentialism. Our current president daily expresses his contempt for democratic institutions and the rule of law. He believes that all three branches of government, not to mention the press and the private sector, should heel to his personal command.   
      He chafes at the constitutions and strains on his power. Now is a dangerous moment to elevate the Supreme Court any justice who would weaken the president's accountability to law. I've elaborated on these points in my written testimony and would be happy to discuss them in response to your questions.   
      Thank you so much.   
GRASSLEY:  Before I take my five minutes, I'd like to since this is I'm going to turn this over to Senator Kennedy to finish the meeting, he will moderate. But I thought I ought to first of all thank the whole panel for participating.   
      And then I want to thank all my colleagues on the committee both Republican and Democrat for their cooperation throughout these four days of hearings and except for the first hour and 15 minutes on Tuesday, they all went very well. So    
GRASSLEY:  In the end.   
KENNEDY:  He's looking at you, Senator Whitehouse.   
GRASSLEY:  So, anyway, I do appreciate the cooperation that we've had the last the last 31 and a half hours.   
GRASSLEY:  Okay. Yes.   
      My first question is to Professor Heinzerling and Professor Shane and this isn't a question that I had my staff prepare but both of you spoke very highly of the fear of presidential power and what he thinks about that. So, I'm asking more of a process question than a substance question, is it is it because you fear having a voice like that on the Supreme Court any under conditions or is it because you think that he's being on the Supreme Court may make a majority understanding the present eight members of the committee that that would make a majority and make it more dangerous than just having one voice?   
GRASSLEY:  Microphone?   
HEINZERLING:  I've been worried about presidential power for decades and across administrations. And so, it isn't just the present moment, although the present moment does make me more fearful of presidential power. It is striking, I will say, even having said that, I will say that there will be a clear five-justice majority for what I consider to be quite extreme views about presidential power.   
      And would you have anything to add, Professor Shane, to what she said?   
SHANE:  My views would be very   
GRASSLEY:  Microphone?   
SHANE:  My views would be very similar and I would echo what Mr. Dean said that I worried about having the most executive power indulgent Supreme Court since the end of World War II.   
GRASSLEY:  Okay.   
      Professor White, I think you heard the question I asked the last panel. We've had people express their constitutional rights in demonstrating at this hearing. You've had my colleagues ask views about whether or not Judge Kavanaugh has a concern about people of less means and you heard it specifically from people on the panel.   
      So, how do you feel his experience shows or doesn't show that he has those would take those concerns into mind?   
WHITE:  Sure. Well, the challenge for any judge is to see the case at hand through the eyes of all parties to the case and those who are affected by the case.   
      And administrative law, real challenge, I teach it and before that, I practiced it. And the real change is to see administrative law through the eyes of those who are regulated as much as through the eyes of the regulator. It's easy to be a professor, right, or be a powered lawyer and see yourself someday wielding the power of an agency.   
      And of course, you want to be independent. Of course, you want the courts to defer to you. But knowing that regulatory power has significant impacts on not just big corporations but on landowners, homeowners, farmers, that's important as well.   
      And so, when the Supreme Court, in recent cases, became more critical of the EPA's impositions on landowners claiming authority to regulate wetlands, right? When Judge Kavanaugh took pause at the impacts that the EPA's unprecedented program for greenhouse gas regulations could have on small businesses churches that fell within the regulatory ambit the EPA was claiming, those two, I think, deserve to be part of this conversation about the impact of government power on people without the means to fight back against it.   
GRASSLEY:  Thank you.   
      And Mr. Clement, since you appear so much before courts and, I guess, I said 90 cases you've argued before the Supreme Court, tell me what type of a judge you see Judge Kavanaugh while being during his time during the times of oral arguments?   
CLEMENT:  Chairman Grassley, I think he's been a exemplary judge on the bench. I think I would describe him as an active judge but he actively questions both sides.   
      I think as an active questioner, he is going to fit right in where he confirmed to the Supreme Court. I think the Supreme Court right now is about the hottest bench that the Supreme Court has ever been. I think each of the last justices that have been confirmed by this committee have tended to ask more questions that the justice they replaced.   
      So, I think he will he will fit right in to what he referred to as the team of nine. And I think from an advocate's perspective, that's what you want. You want somebody who's going to push you but is going to push your adversary in the argument and ask the hard questions of both sides and I think that's what you would get with that's what you're already getting with Judge Kavanaugh on the D.C. circuit and I think that's what you would see on the Supreme Court of the United States.   
GRASSLEY:  Senator Whitehouse?   
WHITEHOUSE:  Thank you, Chairman.   
      Mr. Dean, I don't know if you've been watching the hearings but my take on what we've seen is that for a number of reasons including the "Minnesota Law Review" article in which Judge Kavanaugh expressed a policy desire that the president be immunized from law enforcement investigation and the Kavanaugh comment that U.S. v. Nixon was wrongly decided and "The Georgetown Law Journal" episode in which he was asked as a matter of law, can a president be invaded and put up his hand no with those who agree that president was beyond indictment.   
      So, it was a very live issue through these hearings about whether the president could properly be the subject of an ongoing criminal investigation.   
      And of course, we know that this president is the subject of an ongoing criminal investigation and we further know they separate criminal investigation in which this president has been identified as a named director of the criminal activity. So, in that circumstance, what I heard over and over was professor, sorry, Judge Kavanaugh citing his assertion that U.S. v. Nixon was one of his top four cases. In all other facts being equal, you would say, okay, these other things don't matter very much but since he said U.S. v. Nixon is one of his top four cases, then obviously, that will overwhelm all these other things and we can count on him to do the right thing.   
      But a little bell kept ringing in my mind because whenever he said that, he seemed to just drop very quietly in, that it was a trial court subpoena in U.S. v. Nixon. He never raised that point. He never said this would be very different and separated the two arguments.   
      But it strikes me that if his favorite top four U.S. v. Nixon decision is limited to a trial court subpoena and doesn't protect the ability of law enforcement to proceed through, for instance, a grand jury subpoena. He played a little game with us to try to have the best of both worlds, to reserve a little escape hatch for himself to be able to shut down, for instance, Mueller investigation or Southern District of New York investigation subpoenas while still purporting to uphold United States v. Nixon as a big, favorite decision of his. Would you respond to that?   
      I would agree with your analysis and as I said in my opening statement, I wasn't clear at all that he had reversed his position on U.S. versus Nixon, excuse me, when he said that he wasn't sure it was properly decided.   
      He also used it in the 2016 law journal article along with Marbury versus Madison, Youngstown and Brown v. Board of Education in the context of a judge needed a backbone. He didn't say it was rightly decided and he repeated that several times during the hearings. So, I don't think he has informed this Committee of his real position on that very important case.   
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes. And actually, through our rather clever subterfuge which I think is a shame if that's the case. We'll pursue the question further.   
      Ms. Heinzerling, you have made some powerful statements today, perhaps, the best of which was that there's liberty on both sides of the regulatory equation. As you know we usually see in politics the polluter big money side heavily engaged and then good luck to the individual victim like Hunter LaChance here earlier with his asthma and we very often see phony baloney studies that are put together that look at the cost benefit of regulation but also look at the cost to the polluter to the regulated industry, totally omit what happens on the other side.   
      Could you speak a little bit more about the liberty side of the regulated the beneficiary of the regulation and how they stand up on the political side in terms of the balance of political power on this question?   
KENNEDY:  If you could give us about 30 seconds, Professor.   
HEINZERLING:  Yes. I'd be happy to. The laws that engage the administrative agencies in protecting against the kind of harm I mentioned range across a very broad area and the people who are protected by those rules are the ones who are left unprotected when Judge Kavanaugh says that Congress has no authority to grant that broader power or to give the power, for example, to an independent agency.   
      And we don't hear about that in his opinions at all. We only hear about the liberty of the regulated groups. So, I wonder to what extent he thinks about the people on the other side.   
      And if you think about and if you think of the witnesses who were on the panel before this one, it's basic things, like going outside, enable to go to school on certain days and so forth. Those are basic elements of liberty that I think weighed just as heavily in the legal equation.   
KENNEDY:  Thank you.   
WHITEHOUSE:  Or up to.   
HEINZERLING:  Yes.   
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes.   
KENNEDY:  Thank you, Professor.   
      Professor Coons? My order says Coons and then Klobuchar.    
KENNEDY:  I would never argue with you, Senator.   
      Professor Klobuchar.   
KENNEDY:  Okay.   
KLOBUCHAR:  All right. Thank you very much.   
KENNEDY:  You're welcome, Professor.   
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you to all of you and I'll sort of start where we were ending over there and I spoke, of course, in my questions with Judge Kavanaugh at length about the 2009 article in the Minnesota Law Review, given it's from my state, in which he argued that a president shouldn't be subject to investigations while in office.   
Judge Kavanaugh actually, Mr. Dean, suggested that Congress can always impeach the president if there is evidence of wrongdoing because I asked the similar questions that you raised in your testimony if what if she committed a murder, the president, what if she did this.   
      And he has a different differentiating word of a dastardly crime which I didn't get to the bottom of really. But then also said that, well, you can always impeach the president and one of the questions that I asked was, well, in modern day, these investigations have been done not by Congress but with the special counsel, independent counsel and could you talk about the difficulty if we don't actually have an ability to have an investigation in terms of an impeachment proceeding?   
DEAN:  I was one who believe very strongly in the independent counsel law. I think that's when Congress did express itself that indeed a sitting president could be investigated and that withstood several test on its constitutionality.   
      We're currently with the expiration of the sunset clause of independent counsel law and putting an end to that. We now do it through the regulations of the Department of Justice and there's certainly no restrictions other than a policy right now at the Department of Justice that prohibits investigation of a president.   
      The history of that policy, people seem to forget why it was written. It happened in 1973 when a vice president was under investigation by a Maryland grand jury and defending himself by saying, you can't indict me, you can only impeach me.   
      An opinion was requested of Office of Legal Counsel, excuse me, and they concluded, and I think it was a predetermined solution to a problem, that indeed the vice president could be indicted but the president couldn't be indicted and that is that policy has stood since then.   
KLOBUCHAR:  And you've previously drawn parallel in the Watergate and where we are today. How important was the independence of the federal judiciary in helping our country to weather the Watergate scandal? Just really quickly because I have one other   
DEAN:  It was vital. Let me put it that way.   
KLOBUCHAR:  Okay. I would assume that it was.   
      Professor Heinzerling, thank you for being here. I had asked Judge Kavanaugh about how the White House noted that he has overturned agency action 75 times when they announced his nomination. He said he was a leader in overturning these agency decisions.   
      And when I asked him about it, he responded to me by stating that he has also ruled in favor of agencies at times. What did you think of his response and how do you view his record in this area of law overall?   
HEINZERLING:  It would be astonishing if he ruled against the agency in every case. That would be a sign that something seriously amiss. So, if there's a handful of cases, I think he may have mentioned about six cases something like that in which he ruled in favoring environmentalists, I think most of them were not brought by environmentalists.   
      But if there were a handful of cases, there would be nothing surprising about that and also nothing about it that would indicate that he was even-handed, quite frankly, about the environment. He's issued a number of major decisions narrowing the environmental laws, requiring the cost benefit balancing in the face of either clear or arguably ambiguous language and he has forwarded this message from case after case in the big cases.   
      So, in the little easy cases, it's no surprise if an agency might win some of them or if the environmentalists might win some of them if that's an easy case on a procedural matter. But in the big cases, the big environmental cases, he has been all on the other side. And I'll just say, the Supreme Court only takes big cases.   
KLOBUCHAR:  Thank you very much.   
KENNEDY:  Senator Crapo, you're not interested in answering question? You passed.   
      Senator Coons.   
COONS:  Thank you, Senator Kennedy. I'd like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a report on nomination of Judge Kavanaugh by the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law and by the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund.   
KENNEDY:  Without objection.   
COONS:  Mr. Dean, thank you for your written testimony for appearing before us today. You alone in this panel have the unique historical experience that I think is directly relevant to the question of what happens when presidential power is unchecked and president is not accountable.   
      Based on your experience, what are the dangers of a presidency that doesn't face strong checks in the Supreme Court and Congress and what would have happened in Watergate if President Nixon had been able to avoid compliance with the subpoena or if he had been able to fire the special prosecutor without some consequential response by Congress?   
DEAN:  Well, of course, when he first when he fired the special prosecutor, he reacted to the negative publicity that it generated and the interest of Congress suddenly in impeachment. So, he thought he could possibly stem that tide by bringing a new, he thought initially, favorable and maybe not as aggressive investigation with the appointment of Leon Jaworski.   
      The second special prosecutor, however, was equally as effective as the original one, Archibald Cox, which I don't think the White House had anticipated. As far as the courts and the rulings, we would have a very different history had the Supreme Court not dealt with the tapes case as they did.   
      It would have resulted in Nixon surviving without the tapes. It was my word against his, and in the polling, he while i was outpolling him at times, it wasn't enough to resolve the problem.   
COONS:  So, without the smoking gun which was made possible by the Supreme Court's decision in U.S. v. Nixon, presidential accountability might not have occurred, we might not really know what role the president had played and we might not have avoided the constitutional crisis of both confidence and we might not have removed a criminal president.   
      And Professor Shane, I questioned Judge Kavanaugh fairly aggressively on his view of the scope of presidential authority. Based on his writings, his speeches, his opinions as a judge, I'm concerned he is a view of presidential power that's dangerously unbounded.   
      You've had a chance to review his work, do you share my concerns and what do you make of his enthusiastic and repeated embrace of Scalia's dissent in Morrison?   
SHANE:  There's a lot to that question, Senator.   
COONS:  I'm sure there is.   
SHANE:  So, I'll try to keep it brief. What most concerns me about Judge Kavanaugh's positions not just that he has embraced the tenets of unitary executive theory, but that he has gone to such lengths to try to create a kind of legal foundation for it in the D.C. Circuit in cases that had nothing to do with unitary executive theory.   
      There was much discussion during Mr. Olson's panel about the case of Morrison versus Olson and Judge Kavanaugh, of course, has famously said that he would like to put the final nail in that case. But in the PHH case that was being discussed, this was a case that the D.C. Circuit unanimously resolved on purely statutory grounds, and Judge Kavanaugh saw fit to write an extensive opinion for the panel on the constitutional issue that later got overturned en bankruptcy.   
      But the opinion he issued for the panel pulled out of thin air this completely unmoored theory about why a single-headed independent agency was unconstitutional. It was full of arguments that would be perfectly fine for Congress to entertain as a matter of policy   
COONS:  Right.   
SHANE:  but they had nothing to do with the Constitution. With regard to Morrison versus Olson, it is still good law in the Supreme Court that independent agencies are constitutional. Whether they are good or bad idea is up to Congress which has the power to make all laws necessary and proper, not only for carrying into execution the powers of Congress but the powers of all officers and offices of the United States government.   
COONS:  Thank you, professor.   
      For my last question to Professor Heinzerling, since went around and around about this several times, Judge Kavanaugh and myself, in trying to explain his reliance on or his interest in or I would say his fixation with Scalia's dissent in Morrison, Judge Kavanaugh tried to describe it as sort of a one-off case about a now-expired independent counsel statute and I keep coming back to this dissent in PHH which Professor Shane was just referencing.   
      Do you think that dissent lays out the unitary executive theory and displays some significant enthusiasm for it that is a well-founded justification for my having concerns about Judge Kavanaugh's views on presidential power?   
HEINZERLING:  Absolutely   
KENNEDY:  Professor, if you could just to be fair with everybody, if you could use about 30 seconds.   
HEINZERLING:  Yes. Absolutely, yes. He would have struck down a major federal statute that was very new that set up the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in which Congress had made a judgment about the degree of dependence and the structure of the agency that was necessary in order to counterbalance the power of the financial industry. And he wrote a dissent from an en banc denial in that case. So, yes, absolutely, you are right to be concerned.   
COONS:  I'd like to thank the whole panel and I'll just conclude by pointing out that the reason I raise these concerns in impressing Judge Kavanaugh was that it's exactly his quotes about U.S. v. Nixon, his dissent, his enthusiasm for the dissent in Morrison, his dissent in PHH that leads me to still have concerns that he would not hold the president accountable to investigation, to a subpoena or to a testimony in a way that we need in our current environment.   
      Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
KENNEDY:  Senator, Hirono. Thank you, Senator.   
HIRONO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to our panelists.   
      Mr. Dean, in your written statement, you explained that if Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed, we will have the most pro-presidential powers Supreme Court in the modern era. And then most recently in Trump v. Hawaii, the court upheld the President's basically bald assertion of national security as a way to sustain his Muslim ban.   
      At least one justice, Justice Sotomayor, said that she saw parallels to Korematsu. So, that's already pretty far down the road as far as presidential powers. So, what current controversies do you think might come before this court that you have serious concerns as to how Judge Kavanaugh, if he gets on the court, will support the President?   
DEAN:  In answer excuse me, in answer to your question, I must say that one of the things I did before i came to Washington was talk to some academic friends that I think know an awful lot about presidential powers. They're the people I turn to and have discussed these things at great length.   
      They cited that case as one of the examples of how things are quickly slipping HIRONO:  Where we're headed.   
DEAN:  out of bounds and where we're headed. The fact that we have a president who is unchecked right now by other branches makes it particularly timely to be worried afresh given the Kavanaugh positions on so many cases that would enhance presidential power. He could I could see him as the leader of the 5-4 that would enhance presidential powers.   
HIRONO:  And he did not respond affirmatively to any questions as to whether he would recuse himself   
DEAN:  Exactly.   
HIRONO:  should these kinds of questions come before the Supreme Court.   
      Professor Heinzerling, I found your testimony really interesting because in my review of Judge Kavanaugh's decision, there are various patterns, and i think he does create some new, novel ways to decide agency action cases, for example.   
      And when Judge Gorsuch came before us, there were a lot of questions regarding the what we would call the frozen trucker case in which Judge Gorsuch, in my view, his decision or dissent was just outrageous and defied common sense. And I'd looked at the SeaWorld v. Florida the SeaWorld of Florida case as Judge Kavanaugh's frozen trucker case. Are you familiar with the   
HEINZERLING:  Yes. Yes.   
HIRONO:  So, do you think that this is an example of how far he, Judge Kavanaugh, would go to protect the corporate interests over an individual?   
HEINZERLING:  Yes, I do. Yes, I do. Thank you for that question. In SeaWorld, he took a clear statute, a statute that really fit the situation like a glove and held that it did not fit that situation because he could imagine that the single enforcement action based on a single day at a single amusement park might be deployed, that theory might be deployed to rule out tackles in football, and that can't be what the Congress meant.   
      And so, he took clear language about assuring a reasonable workplace against recognized harms that were avoidable and that the agency has held in an evidentiary hearing all of those factual circumstances were met in that case. And he said no, in dissent, he said no, I don't believe this is covered by the statute because I can't believe Congress meant to rule out tackles in football.   
      That wasn't what the case was about, and it was absolutely, in my opinion, a departure from both the language of the statute and the interpretation by the agency and common sense.   
HIRONO:  I think there is a pattern of that kind of decision making by Justice Kavanaugh. Let me cite to a couple of other examples. The standing is one of the threshold issues. If you don't have standing, you're out of court.   
      So, for example, in Public Citizen Inc. v. National Highway Safety Highway Traffic Safety Administration, there was a public interest group challenging the questioning the adequacy of tighter safety standards because they thought that this may increase the risk of harm.   
      He found that that was way too speculative, an interest to articulate. So, this public interest group was out. On the other hand, in Grocery Manufacturers Association v. EPA where they grocery manufacturers process food people challenge EPA actions saying, well, what you are making us do might increase prices for them and that would just be too much, and he said, that was not too speculative for him.   
      So, when business interest comes forth and says, this is going to cause us money maybe but when a public group comes out and says, this is going to harm people, he finds that too speculative. Have you seen this kind of pattern in his decision making?   
HEINZERLING:  Yes. And I will say that this is a pattern I think across standing cases where the courts have, in my opinion, wrongly made it very difficult for public interest groups, in particular, groups like environmental groups to come to court to complain about violations of federal law and they make it very easy for business groups to do that. So, that's a very in some way subtle way of loading the dice against the public interest groups that we've been talking about.   
HIRONO:  The Roberts court is already heading toward they're much more oriented toward protecting corporate interest over individual rights. We don't need another justice going in that direction.   
      Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   
KENNEDY:  Thank you, Senator.   
      Senator Blumenthal.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Thank you, Senator Kennedy.   
      Welcome to you all and thank you for being here. I know some of you have come from a far distance but you recognize as we do the importance of this decision for us.   
      And I want to begin by asking Mr. Dean a couple of questions. Sir, when you came forward which was before the United States versus Nixon case, you didn't write anonymous op-ed, did you?   
DEAN:  No, I did not.   
BLUMENTHAL:  You came forward and   
DEAN:  Actually, I did send my only discussion with the media was having my secretary read a quickly dictated line to get to my superiors. They were making a mistake if they were going to make me the scapegoat of their activities.   
BLUMENTHAL:  In effect, you announced to the world what you were going to do.   
DEAN:  I did.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And to your superiors.   
DEAN:  Yes.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And the result was a bombshell.   
DEAN:  Yes.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And the United States versus Nixon case produced evidence that corroborated the evidence that you had provided, correct?   
DEAN:  Well, I had testified. I believe that I had been recorded. That prompted the Senate staff to ask Mr. Butterfield if that was possible. He said it's very possible and very likely.   
      The special counsel filed immediately for those tapes, the tape cases and the fight in the court started. The whole dynamics of Watergate changed and it became all about obtaining the tapes and whether they would corroborate or not my testimony.   
BLUMENTHAL:  I can remember vividly a picture of Alexander Butterfield revealing those tapes and it was also a bombshell, correct?   
DEAN:  July 16, 1973, it was.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And we could go through the history here but where I'm going with my points is that it wasn't just or maybe even primarily United States Supreme Court and United States v. Nixon, it was a number of individuals who had the backbone and guts to come forward whatever motives at that time and speak that truth to power, correct?   
DEAN:  Yes.   
BLUMENTHAL:  So, we tend here to talk about the law, about U.S. v. Nixon, about a unitary president, about all kinds of concepts that mean little to the American people but we're talking about basic courage to stop a constitutional crisis.   
DEAN:  The system is important to those who do want to rely on it.   
BLUMENTHAL:  There is now arguably a cancer on the presidency as malignant and metastasizing as there was then, correct?   
DEAN:  Yes, I would agree with that.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And the only way to really stop it is not by relying on laws alone but on people respecting the laws, taking acts of personal courage and coming forward to speak that truth to power, would you agree?   
DEAN:  Even with anonymous op-eds.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Even with anonymous op-eds which could lead others to come forward   
DEAN:  Yes.   
BLUMENTHAL: non-anonymously.   
DEAN:  Yes.   
BLUMENTHAL:  But cases are not built on anonymous sources. Eventually, there have to be witnesses willing to testify and speak that truth to power.   
      You have said that your belief is that President Trump would never resign because he, I'm going to paraphrase, is shameless. I think you've used something like this.   
DEAN:  Yes.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Would you give us, in your view, your analysis knowing Richard Nixon as you did, the reasons why he resigned, I suspect it had something to do with the fact that he saw impeachment coming and he was told by Hugh Scott and Everett Dirksen that he lack the votes in the Senate to avoid conviction. But let me ask you your   
DEAN:  It was very much the fact that he was going to lose in an impeachment battle that the House would impeach and the Senate would find him guilty and remove that appeared to be the case. But I think also Richard Nixon had done something that was made very awkward for him.   
      He had pulled people aside and told them of falsehood that he had nothing to do with the cover-up until I had told him about it, which was a flat out lie and he had been caught in that by the release of the so-called smoking gun tape.   
      But even more basically I think he left because the man at his core had a respect for rule of law. That's one of the differences I find today from Mr. Trump and the reason I don't think he would resign. He could care less about the rule of law.   
BLUMENTHAL:  And ultimately also   
KENNEDY:  Thank you. Begin to wrap up.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Yes. Sure, Senator.   
KENNEDY:  Go ahead. One more.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Ultimately also it was those Republicans in the United States Senate who delivered the message, we won't stand for it.   
DEAN:  That's correct.   
BLUMENTHAL:  Thank you.   
KENNEDY:  Thank you.   
      Allow me to ask a few questions and I'd love to be able to ask all of you questions. I just don't know if I have time.   
      Let me start with Ms. Mastal. Did I say your name   
MASTAL:  Yes. That's correct.   
KENNEDY:  I want to be sure I understand. Judge Kavanaugh coached your daughter?   
MASTAL:  Yes.   
KENNEDY:  And his daughter was on the team at that time?   
MASTAL:  Correct.   
KENNEDY:  And when he finished coaching the kids, at the end of the season, he wrote them all personal notes?   
MASTAL:  Yes, a detailed evaluation of things to work on, things you did well and then the final note which is what I read.   
KENNEDY:  Does he generally do that for his teams or do you know?   
MASTAL:  I think he does it for everybody on the team, for every team he's coached.   
KENNEDY:  Okay. I want to switch gears, I think that her Professional White and Professor is it Heinzerling, Heinzerling, my apologies, talk a little bit about the transfer of power from Congress to the President and I'm thinking of it in terms of Chevron doctrine.   
      Here's my and I'd like you to each quickly help me out with this. Here's my problem with the Chevron Deference, I just don't understand how much constitutional and here's why. I look at the APA which, of course, Congress passed and Congress says the review this is the law, the reviewing court, not the agency, the reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of the law, interpret constitutional and statutory provisions and determine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an agency action.   
      That's a statute, 5 U.S.C. Section 706 as I'm sure both of you know better than I do. So, how can the courts construe that congressional directive as giving the power to our agency? I mean, that was not currently not Congress's intent. Could you each give me about 30 seconds on that?   
HEINZERLING:  This is a great question and it's a puzzle in the administrative law a little bit. The text of the Administrative Procedure Act says what you say it says and has been sort of hidden from view in a way for a number of years.   
      But I think the answer would be that even where a court defers to an administrative agency on the interpretation it's offered, it's still making the legal judgments, the relevant legal judgments.   
      It is deciding, in the first instance, is the statute so clear that it shouldn't defer at all and in the second instance, even if the statute isn't clear, it's making the judgment about whether that interpretation is permissible.   
KENNEDY:  So, if I could not to interrupt you but I have to keep this on schedule.   
HEINZERLING:  That's fine.   
KENNEDY:  So, you think that Chevron Deference is unconstitutional what you're saying?   
HEINZERLING:  No. I think it's consistent with the language of the administrative procedure. I don't think it's unconstitutional.   
KENNEDY:  You don't think?   
HEINZERLING:  No.   
KENNEDY:  Okay. Professor White?   
WHITE:  One of the interesting things about Chevron and it's relatively short history is that you have critics and proponents on both sides of the aisle. The most delicate case for Chevron's constitutionality and proprietary came from Justice Scalia in the 1989 Duke Law Journal article.   
      That said, there's been an increasing awareness I think on both sides that in the biggest cases, Chevron Deference illustrates either a delegation of judicial power to an agency or respects a delegation of legislative power to an agency.   
      That's why you see I think most recently in the King v. Burwell case where Chief Justice Roberts with Justices   
KENNEDY:  I got to stop you, Professor White.   
WHITE:  Ginsburg, Breyer and others set aside Chevron.   
KENNEDY:  Okay. I got it. You helped me a lot there.   
      Professor Mascott, did I say that correctly?   
MASCOTT:  Yes, Senator.   
KENNEDY:  Did you ever see Judge Kavanaugh take politics into consideration in deciding a case?   
MASCOTT:  No. Judge Kavanaugh spent his time learning the record inside out looking at the law, statutes and precedent.   
KENNEDY:  But you're with him?   
MASCOTT:  Yes, sir.   
KENNEDY:  You never saw him take politics.   
MASCOTT:  No.   
KENNEDY:  Ever?   
MASCOTT:  No.   
KENNEDY:  Not once?   
MASCOTT:  No.   
KENNEDY:  Okay. Fair enough. Mr. Clement, should the Supreme Court televise oral arguments?   
KENNEDY:  Could you turn your mike on?   
CLEMENT:  That's an excellent question. I think sure. I think that that's an excellent question. It's a question the justices are ultimately going to have to answer at some point unless Congress forces its hand by passing statute then it will be a very interesting question whether that statute is constitutional.   
      My only view for what it's worth is that televising Supreme Court arguments makes an awful lot of sense. It's one of the odd realities that everybody seems to think that until they become a Supreme Court justice and then they tend to have a different view.   
      But as I sit here as a Supreme Court advocate, I honestly don't see a particular compelling argument why the public shouldn't get to see where the proceedings televised and I think if they did, they have a very high opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States.   
KENNEDY:  Well, I appreciate that. You're hell of a lawyer. All right. I'll let Senator Hirono go over. So, I'm going to go over 20 seconds.   
      Mr. Dean, I don't care about your politics. I really don't. I have friends on both sides of the aisle. Like Senator Blumenthal, I remember vividly the early 1970s as well when you worked in the White House.   
      I think you and your co-conspirators hurt my country. I believe in second chances. But you did the right thing, ultimately but you only did it when you were cornered like a rat.   
      And it's hard for me to take your testimony seriously and I'm going to give you a chance to respond, but I couldn't sleep tonight if I didn't tell you that. I might give you a chance to respond   
DEAN:  The President has also called me a rat and I don't think you understand   
KENNEDY:  I'm not calling you a rat though   
DEAN:  No.   
KENNEDY:  in the sense of you're what you did with the prosecutor. That's not what I mean. But I honestly feel that way as an American, I think you hurt our country.   
DEAN:  I wrote a book based on all the Watergate conversations that were secretly recorded, learned a lot that I hadn't known. Out of the thousand conversations that Nixon had on Watergate, I was involved in 39 of them.   
      I think every conversation I had with him, I'm trying to warn him, alert him, find out how much he does know or doesn't know. I tried internally to end the coverup. I didn't succeed.   
      That's the day I think I met Richard Nixon. I didn't know the man, hadn't had dealings with him. There's a great misconception about what an early 30s White House counsel could do around a White House.   
      So, maybe you'd want to I'll send you a copy of that book. It might give you some insights into what really did happen in there.   
KENNEDY:  Okay. All right. Well, we're done. I want to thank this panel very much. And I'll say what I said with the earlier panels, I know this testimony doesn't just write itself and you all spend a lot of time on it and I really want to thank you. I think all of us get a lot out of this part of the confirmation process.   
      The record will remain open until noon on Monday and that's consistent with other Supreme Court nominee practices. With that, thanks to everyone. These hearings are adjourned.  
