GRASSLEY:  Are you ready, judge?  
KAVANAUGH:   
GRASSLEY:  Senator Booker.  
BOOKER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      Judge, we at 1:20 p.m. today received another 1,000 documents. And I'm just wanting to know, are you familiar with the 1,000 documents we just received at 1:20 p.m. today? Are you familiar with those documents or what's in those documents?  
KAVANAUGH:  I haven't been involved in the documents. So I don't know what you have and what I don't know.  
BOOKER:  So even if I were to ask you questions from one of those 1,000 documents, you wouldn't you would need to see them?  
KAVANAUGH:  Even if I've seen them before, I would like to see them.  
BOOKER:  I I understand. So, 1,000 documents, the idea that any senator up here could go through 1,000 documents since 1:20 p.m. and ask you questions, have you have a chance to see what we'd like to ask in questions seems a little absurd.   
      If Bill Burke was the one to give those documents, I can't help but wonder what else again, he might be holding back what else that he might be trying to hide. And so, I understand you stand by your record. But it's our job to try to examine that record, the fullness of that record.  
      And so, I just want to ask you some questions, perhaps, that can illuminate Bill Burke's role. And so, judge, have you communicated in any way with Bill Burke or his team since Justice Kennedy's retirement announcement on June 27, 2018?  
KAVANAUGH:  I I I saw him on the Saturday after my the Saturday after my nomination, I saw him at an event, a a social event with a number of people.  
BOOKER:  Was that the  
KAVANAUGH:  But  
BOOKER:   was did you communicate with him beyond that?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, I have not communicated with him beyond that, nor do I have I had I I've said before, on the documents I haven't been involved in the substance, the process. I've stayed away from that. That's an issue for the Senate and the Bush Library.  
BOOKER:  OK. So if you haven't communicated directly with him about this process, have any of your intermediaries that have been working with you or prepared you for this been in discussions with Bill Burke or his team since Justice Kennedy's retirement announcement on June 27, 2018?  
KAVANAUGH:  All I can say is what what I've what I know.  
BOOKER:  So to your knowledge, you don't know if your people who've been preparing you for this have been in consultation or coordination with Bill Burke?  
KAVANAUGH:  When you say people?  
BOOKER:  Who are the you you've been helped to prepare for these hearings, I imagine.  
KAVANAUGH:  You mean White House and Justice Department people?  
BOOKER:  I I whoever it might be helping you prepare for these hearings.  
KAVANAUGH:  I I don't know what the white the White House and Justice Department people can speak for themselves about that, I don't.  
BOOKER:  I I guess what, you see, I'm asking you is if the folks that who are preparing you have been communicating with Bill Burke about these documents, what's being released or anything like that. And do you do you you have no knowledge of that, or do you know if people who've been preparing you have been in contact and communication with Bill Burke about these documents?  
KAVANAUGH:  I I I don't know what the process has been, other than what I  
BOOKER:  But I'm not asking about the process. I'm asking do you know if the people who've been preparing you have been in touch will Bill Burke about the documents, the contents in the documents or anything related to the documents?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't know the answer to that question.  
BOOKER:  You you do not know if the people who've been preparing you have in any way been communicating with Bill Burke about the documents?  
KAVANAUGH:  Can you you want to identify some specific  
BOOKER:  No, sir. I'm just asking you that.  
KAVANAUGH:  As who prepare just want to make sure we're on the same page  
BOOKER:  Yes, sir.  
KAVANAUGH:   so that there's no confusion. I I don't know who's I've been staying out of it, for obvious reasons. I mean, I've I've repeated, it's not my privilege to assert.  
BOOKER:  And so you've never taken an you've never taken a stand regarding the release of the documents with anybody in the White House, the DOJ, or anyone else? You've never taken a stand on this  
KAVANAUGH:  This is an issue for the Bush Library  
BOOKER:   I I understand it was an issue, you've stated this on the record. I'm just asking have you ever taken a stand with anyone from the White House or the DOJ about document release?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, I don't have a they I don't have a position stand on  
BOOKER:  I know you don't have a position. I'm I'm asking what has transpired.  
KAVANAUGH:   Right. And I I'm in the position that, I think, Justice Scalia was in when he was being asked about his memos from the Office of Legal Counsel. And he said that's a decision for  
BOOKER:  Again, I  
KAVANAUGH:   quite a lot  
BOOKER:   short amount of time. I appreciate your knowledge of Justice Scalia's record and statements. I just want to know what you think, sir, and what you know.  
KAVANAUGH:  What I think is that it's a I'm just going to repeat myself about what I think. It's an issue for the Senate and the Bush Library.  
BOOKER:  So why why don't we move on.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK.  
BOOKER:  You told Ranking Member Feinstein and Senator Coons that you had never taken a position on the constitutionality of criminally investigating or indicting a sitting president. Do you stand by what you told the ranking member?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm happy to have my recollection refreshed.  
BOOKER:  Sir  
KAVANAUGH:  But that's my recollection.  
BOOKER:   OK. You've told Senator Klobuchar that you quote, "Did not take a position on the constitutionality. Period." end quote. You you stand by that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes. And I'm happy to have my recollection refreshed, but that is my recollection as I sit here  
BOOKER:  And that's your position now? You that you you because you said this to me in private as well that  
KAVANAUGH:   Yes.  
BOOKER:   you've never taken a stand on the constitutionally of this issue about the about investigating or indicting a sitting president.  
KAVANAUGH:  I I think in the various Georgetown events, I referred to it as a a open question. In my Minnesota Law Review, I referred to it as an open question. I think here I have referred to it as an open question. And I I I've said, if it comes to me, you know, a lot of things would have to happen  
BOOKER:  But have you indicated your views  
KAVANAUGH:   Can I just  
BOOKER:  I I just  
KAVANAUGH:   just 20 seconds  
BOOKER:   I just want to try to get the question in, so you understand what I'm asking you.  
KAVANAUGH:   Yes. Yes, sir.  
BOOKER:  The constitutionality itself, have you taken an issue on the constitutionally of these issues about criminally indicting or investigating a sitting president?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, I've said repeatedly and here's  
BOOKER:  No. That was it. Yes or no, you said no. Can I just  
KAVANAUGH:   But  
BOOKER:   Can I refresh your recollection with things you have said, sir? So, this is a Georgetown article and, again, I I have the quotes  
KAVANAUGH:   Right, that's seems that  
BOOKER:   OK. I'm just  
KAVANAUGH:   suggests  
BOOKER:   I just want to walk through it, OK. So you you you agree, you did say this. You said, quote, "The Constitution itself seems to dictate,"  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
BOOKER:   So you're expressing a view on the constitutionality. Look at what you wrote in the Washington Post, "The Constitution," again you use a conditional word, "appears to preclude,"  
KAVANAUGH:  Appears.  
BOOKER:   but you talked about the constitutionality, appears to preclude  
KAVANAUGH:  And and that was  
BOOKER:   Please  
KAVANAUGH:   in the Georgetown Law Journal in in 1998. And as it's been reported, I had advised my advice to Independent Counsel Starr was not to seek  
BOOKER:  In the Minnesota Law Review article, you said the that, "The Constitution establishes a clear mechanism," talking about the what the Constitution establishes, yes?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, let's let's be very clear. Can I get 30 seconds?  
BOOKER:  Yes, of course.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK. So the Constitution obviously sets out a mechanism for removal.  
BOOKER:  Yes.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right. The question of criminal indictment is simply a question of timing. And the question is, does it have to be after or may it also be before. The Justice Department 10 more seconds the Justice Department for 45 years has said it must be after.   
BOOKER:  And I and I guess you see what I'm getting at here, is that you've talked about this issue quite a bit. Even the what Senator Whitehouse brought up, when you were asked people were asked to raise their hand, give a hand how many people believe a sitting as a matter of law, that a sitting president cannot be indicted during the term of office, we saw the video tape, you you raised your hand.   
      You've commented on it multiple times. I guess this is sort of what I'm saying. I'm going to I'm going to get this   
KAVANAUGH:  It said it said law, right? In the justice it didn't say constitution   
BOOKER:  As a matter of law. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.   
KAVANAUGH:  Right. And I do think it's important again, I don't want to take too much of your time. But it's important to know that the Justice Department since 1973 and to this the day, through Republican and Democratic administrations has had that position. So before it could come to a court if I'm on the D.C. circuit, before it could come to a court, that position presumably would have to change after 45 years, it would have to change and then a a prosecutor with a president would have to decide I want to go forward as a matter of prudence and then third, would have to decide you have the evidence.   
BOOKER:  OK, so   
KAVANAUGH:  And then fourth, a they would have to be challenged.   
BOOKER:  Sir, OK   
KAVANAUGH:  after that all that, it would get to court.   
BOOKER:  Sir, OK. OK.   
KAVANAUGH:  And then I would consider   
BOOKER:  I I want to move on. But but you you've you've made clear that you've never you know, spoken about these issues in a constitutional manner and I'm just want to say that that in in a lot of your statements, it seems like that you're not just talking about this as a matter of policy, you're you're making speculations about the constitutionality of it, which I think sends a clear signal about where you stand on those issues. I really want to move on because   
KAVANAUGH:  I promise you I have an open mind.   
BOOOKER:  OK. You speak a lot in your speeches and articles about about the matter of character. And and just looking at what President Trump's comments there's a number of sources that keep track of how many lies he tells. There's about it's sort of stunning that according to one source, he's made 4,200 misleading claims during his presidency. That's an average of about 7.6 false or misleading statements per day. Now, I've listened to you speak a lot about the character and the character of the presidency.   
      In Duke University in 2000, for example, you said that character matters and that the president of the United States should not should be a role model for America. Do you still think character matters for the president of the United States?   
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, given the lead in to your question, you've heard had me talk about I need to stay so far away from my political commentary.   
BOOKER:  I'm three zip codes away, I've heard you say it a number of times.   
KAVANAUGH:  Three zip codes.   
BOOKER:  And and and but that wasn't what you did when you were a Bush appointee. You talked a lot about Bush's character. Even in your confirmation hearing. You said, at your swearing in ceremony you were willing to comment about President Bush, who and his character. In fact, you said he was you had the greatest respect for President Bush. Now, we have a president now that has said a lot of comments and and this isn't a in any way a partisan or political issue because people on both sides of the aisle have denounced the kind of statements that this president has made.   
      Matters of character. Trump President Trump has during the campaign referred to immigrants as racist. He said a federal judge was unable to do his job because of his heritage. He bragged about sexually assaulting women, he has mocked a disabled reporter. I could go on and on and on. The list they provided me here is long but my time is is brief. Do you want to say right now, do you have the greatest respect? You said it about the last president. You thought it was OK. Do you have to greatest respect for Donald Trump?   
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, do reiterate, you  
BOOKER:  You can't even say if you have great respect for Donald Trump?   
KAVANAUGH:  You don't hear sitting judges commenting on political  
BOOKER:  I'm asking what you said about President Bush in in the last time you were before the United States Senate. Do you have the greatest respect for Donald Trump?   
KAVANAUGH:  I appreciate the question. And what I have said, during this process, is I need to stay away  
BOOKER:  And you don't need to report it, three zip codes away. You don't need to repeat it again, you're not answering my question. And I want to tell you why I'm building toward this. Because this issue of this president who's asking for loyalty tests from the people he's putting forth for offices.   
      Now you've heard how he's continuing to bash the attorney general of the United States of America, and saying that that if he knew he was going to recuse himself, that he wouldn't have put him forward. You've seen this president demanding loyalty, expecting loyalty. President Trump not only said that about Jeff Sessions, but you know he's said that about other folks. And so you're not willing to say about the comment on the character of the president, you are not willing to say if you have great respect for this president.   
      Just last night, you wouldn't comment on the fact that the president to one of my other colleagues when he was talking about both sides being to blame, really excusing, it seems, the behavior of neo-Nazis. And and I'm just wondering what kind of loyalty is being required of you for this job? That that's what I'm building to by asking you, and trying to keep apples to apples.   
      What you said about President Bush, why aren't you saying it about President Trump? And so I want to just just build to this in the remaining time I have left, in May of 2016, then-Candidate Trump put out his first list of potential Supreme Court nominees, you weren't on that list. In September 2016, He put out another longer list, you weren't on that one. Then in May 2017, something incredible happened. Robert Mueller was appointed by the special counsel to investigate any links in coordination between the Russian government and the Trump campaign. The president was now in jeopardy.   
      Or at least his campaign was. He was a subject of a criminal investigation. And then President Trump puts out a third list of nominees and your name is on the list. Now you've heard so many of my colleagues asking about your views of the Constitutionality of a president being investigated. You're failing to at least hold President Trump in your eyes to the same level of the presidential character of which you talk about in speech after speech, and suddenly you're going mum as to the character of the president, given all his lies, all his remarks that have been renounced actually criticized on both sides of the aisle.   
      And now there's a suspicion, and I don't think it's a big leap to think that the public has this suspicion, that somehow, you're in a position and I wonder do you credibly believe that if you agreed right now to recuse yourself, do you credibly believe that somehow, like he said with Jeff Sessions, that he would not hold your nomination up, if you recuse yourself, do you credibly believe that?   
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, in this process, I need to uphold the independence of the judiciary. And one of those  
BOOKER:  But that's what is at question right here. Right now, there's a shadow over the independence of the judiciary, because a president who has been credibly accused by his former lawyer of being an unindicted co-conspirator has an opportunity to put a judge on the bench. The only judge that was added to the list that was added after the Mueller investigation, of all those judges, you're the only one that has spoken extensively from raising your hand at a Georgetown law school event to speaking about it.   
      I don't think it's a big leap. To have the common person begin to suspect that you're being put up right now, a person that can't even speak to the character of this president, won't say what you said about George Bush, that you have the greatest respect for a president. And granted, it's hard to say about someone who brags about sexually assaulting women. It is understandable for people to suspect that there's something going on, that somehow this is rigged, that you are going to get on that bench, and I hear you're admonitions, that you're going to be independent, but the suspicion is clearly there.   
      And so you've written extensively about this. You've spoken to the issue. You've written about the issue in law journals. Can you tell me why the common person, millions of Americans, wouldn't sit back and say, well, this is Donald Trump, who's demanded loyalty from a FBI director, demanded loyalty from the attorney general.   
      All the people he seems to be putting in positions of law enforcement in fact, he criticizes in the most as a tweet we saw right before the hearings began, criticizes very dramatically the Justice Department for doing investigations on folks it seems because they are Republicans in the most partisan way. And to me, that casts a shadow over these whole processes.   
      It's a shadow of course that's extended by not having your documents, it's extended by not having access to your full record. But can you speak to that for me, sir? Can you speak to that credible suspicion that people might have, that this system is somehow rigged and the president is putting somebody up, just to protect him from a criminal investigation?   
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, three quick points. One, my only loyalty is to the Constitution and I have made it clear, I'm an independent judge. Two, the Justice Department for 45 years has taken the position and still does, that a sitting president may not be indicted while still in office. Three, I have not taken a position on the Constitutionality, and promised you I have an open mind on that question.   
      And four, I did talk about a congressional proposal, which was not enacted. And as you've heard me say for two days, I draw a distinction between what Congress does and what the Constitution requires. So, just because I talked about something for Congress to consider in the wake of the experience with President Bush, does not mean that I think that's in the Constitution, I've made clear that I have not taken a position on the constitutionality and have an open mind.   
      So if you put the four points together, I think you should conclude that I and read my 12 years of opinions and read the letters and read the teaching evaluation and look at my whole life, I think that you should conclude respectfully that I have independence required to be a good judge.   
BOOKER:  I appreciate and respect your. And I afford you, sir, our respect as well. You've spent your whole life in public service. And you and I both know, and I'm not sure if you will say it right now, this is unusual times in the United States of America. If you had told me, what's been going on in the last three or four months was going to happen four years ago, I would think you're describing a fiction novel and not something that actually could be happening in our country right now.   
      You've seen in the last few days, everything from a high level white House official writing about the chaos in the president, invoking the 25th amendment, which you know very well, and much more. The president under investigation, people surrounding him being indicted, criminally charged. All of us, I I I really believe this, every single senator up here is going to be tested. The test for all of us is coming. And the test for the Supreme Court is coming as well. And this is going to be a time if we have a constitutional crisis where the faith in this country will be tested, shaken again. And it's really important that the Supreme Court be above suspicion.   
      And and so Senator Blumenthal asked you this:  I sent you a letter. Why not, right now right now even at the jeopardy of President Trump pulling back your nomination, why not now alleviate all of that suspicion that the reasonable person can have why not just announce right now that you will recuse yourself from any matters coming before the Supreme Court involving the Mueller investigation?   
KAVANAUGH:  Because if I committed to how I would decide or resolve a particular case, and that would be doing   
BOOKER:  But wouldn't a recusal take you out of the position that you had to decide or resolve? To say that this is a this is a time in this nation where I should do the right thing and just take that suspicion off to restore the faith in the Supreme Court and in this country?   
GRASSLEY:  I have 10 minutes on my time. I'll give you whatever time you want to respond to it, and I'll make sure you aren't interrupted.   
KAVANAUGH:  Just a few seconds. I   
GRASSLEY:  Look at me, will you please? I'm the guy that gave you the time.   
KAVANAUGH:  Oh, yes sir.   
        
      Try to try to keep you both.   
      If I committed to deciding a particular case, which includes committing to whether I would participate in a particular case, all I would be doing is demonstrating that I don't have the independence of the judiciary, that is, of the judging that is necessary to be a good judge, because all of the nominees who've gone before have declined to commit because that would be inconsistent with judicial independence.   
GRASSLEY:  Senator Tillis?   
TILLIS:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And Judge Kavanaugh, if you want to continue to look at the chair you can, because he gave me the time.   
        
      Mr. Chair, I'd like unanimous consent to introduce some documents for the record. First is from 13 states' Attorneys Generals who, among other things, said that Judge Kavanaugh has an unshakeable respect for the proper role of the courts within the Constitutional structure.   
      I have an op-ed from the New Hampshire Union Leader. Among other things, they said that Kavanaugh is an experienced, well-qualified pick. Another document is from 80 former law students at Harvard Law. They say Judge Kavanaugh consistently encouraged the students to voice different viewpoints, even if they're even if others or the judge himself might disagree.   
      Another document written or, I should say article written by Jonathan Turley, The Hill, who says that no one can use the Mueller probe to hold up the Supreme Court Nominee. Another document from Salvador Rizzo from the The Washington Post; basically the question is, does Brett Kavanaugh think that the president is immune from criminal charges? And his assumption or, his assertion is that Kavanaugh does not think so.   
      Ed Whelan, National Review, Dem's latest documents hullabaloo. Catholic Charity CEO, someone that I know Judge Kavanaugh's worked closely with, he says, I know Brett to be a man committed to his community and to those less fortunate. Catholic Youth Organization basketball parents and I might add, I coached my kids, and I actually think that parents are the toughest constituents here to get support from, and you apparently have done that and they've submitted letters to that effect.   
      Also, a letter from the Charleston Post and Courier editorial board, Kavanaugh, the right choice. From the Boston Herald Staff, Nix the toxic, give Brett Kavanaugh a shot. From William Whitaker, the President of the Washington Jesuit Academy, applauding Judge Kavanaugh for the work that he's done for tutoring over the past few or several years.  
      From my former colleagues in the House, a letter from the majority said the House and Senate supporting Brett Kavanaugh's nomination. From my Lieutenant Governor supporting same.   
      And finally a letter from the DOJ dated August 5, 2005 in response to Senator Joe Biden, at the times, request for Justice Roberts' information. I think it's a very interesting read.   
      Now, before I make some comments and home to keep the record alive before yielding back   
       
GRASSLEY:  Wait wait wait a minute. You asked permission to put them in the record. Without objection, so ordered. Proceed.   
TILLIS:  Thank you. They first, before I get start, I think it's really important. I ran over to a convenience store when I was taking a break and thinking I'm taking a break the other members are taking a break, hopefully Judge Kavanaugh did. The ones who weren't taking a break were the staff.  
      So I'd like to thank the staff on both sides of the aisle. I know you work hard. And to the police who are working mandatory 16 hour shifts. You know its one thing it's hard it's very difficult for those of you facing forward to see what they're doing.  
      But I don't think you understand the complex operation and the work they're doing to keep us all safe. And those who are exercising their First Amendment right safe. And finally to the Chair. Thank you.   
      You've done a great job as you always do and I appreciate your fairness. I love your sense of humor and I look forward to us continuing this for probably about another five hours.  
      Now now, I've got to get on to a few things. And you know Judge, when I was Speaker of the House in North Carolina for four years and when we'd get into extended debates and our conference would meet at a break, I would say guys if it's already been said don't say it again.  
      So there's not a whole lot more I'm going to say. Clearly we've we've got an impasse. Everything in impasse didn't start based on the discussions we had over the last three days. The impasse started, in some cases, before you were ever nominated.  
      There are people on the other side of the aisle, including people on this committee, who oppose your nomination on a fill in the blank bases before you were ever nominated. And all they did is fill in the blank on July 10th.  
      These are the insertions people made, they already concluded before they saw the first document and they weren't going to change their mind. Now, they do deserve getting as many documents as possible and they'll have more time to get documents.   
      I want to make a point on the 1,000 documents that the senator from New Jersey mentioned. It's actually 1,000 pages. Not a 1,000 documents. So let's just be sure to be clear on volume and let's also be clear that those documents are publicly available.   
      And let's also be clear that the record will be held open until early next week. So additional questions for the record, I assume, and other information can be submitted. Next week, you'll go into the hearing or you'll go into the committee, you'll be held over.  
      That's another week. The following week, you'll go to committee, we'll have debates again. Another opportunity for comments to be made by the same members who have already made up their mind.  
      And then hopefully the following week you'll be on the floor and every member will have an opportunity to have their say on the floor. So for anybody to say that this discussion is over and the discovery is over over the next couple hours is simply creating theater.  
      Now I want to talk a little bit about theater. I want to talk about what happened last night. I I've I did something I seldom do. I seldom interrupt another member regardless of how much I want to talk.   
      Last night was the first time of probably only three times in the three and a half years I've been in the U.S. Senate. But the reason I did it is I felt like we were going down a bath that subsequently proved to be true.  
      And at the time, Senator Kennedy was Chair and he rightfully allowed the discussion to go. But I want to talk about the timeline that occurred and then what happened this morning.  
      So at about 9:30 last night we had an exchange where you were being asked to respond to something that you hadn't seen. We subsequently found out it was because it was committee confidential.  
      And again, I'm not an Ivy school attorney, but I really feel like when you got M-30 point type running diagonally across the page, something that says committee confidential, you probably ought not read verbatim from it. But that's what happened last night.  
      But about 9:30 last night, a request was made to release those documents. That's one of the reasons why I thank the staff because those staff stayed up until about 4 am this morning, talking first with President Bush's people, then talking with the White House and getting it cleared.  
      And they were cleared and in an email box at about 3:15 this morning. 3:30. Now, I don't expect somebody to check their email at 3:15 or 3:30, maybe some of you do. But certainly in the six hours between the time that email hit your email box and the theatrics that happened on the in this chamber today, you could have actually found out that you didn't have to be Spartacus.  
      You didn't have to go interact with civil disobedience. You got what you wanted. Could have come in here and started out had a discussion about it if you wanted to. Incorporated into the discussion today.   
      But that would have given you an opportunity to put that in the proper context. So perhaps it wasn't as helpful. The fact of the matter is what happened today and what's happened subsequent to this afternoon reminds me of something I'm more likely to see at the Kennedy center.  
      Maybe a version of "Much Ado about Nothing" but not really appropriate for what we're doing here. Now, I've been I've noticed I love watching people and body language. And I have noticed you I have had hash marks for the number of times we've interrupted.  
      I just didn't think I could keep track of the number of times that you touched that pocket constitution. And I have to know and I know it's tattered; it's almost a metaphor for the very document itself. Challenged, kind of torn through but kept together, largely intact.   
      Hopefully will continue to be intact. But do you have a story behind that pocket constitution?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I got it about 25 years ago. I know that because the 27th Amendment, which was ratified in 1992, is not in my version. So I have written in 27th Amendment in my handwriting.  
      And then I've used it each year teaching my classes at Harvard Law School on separation of powers and the Constitution and I've written a lot of notes and there's a lot of ink in there.   
      And the assignment on the first for the first day of class is students have to read the entire Constitution word for word and for the last day of class they have to read the entire Constitution word for word.  
      And on the first day of class for about the first hour or hour and a half, I give them a tour of the Constitution. So I start with the beginning and kind of roll through the whole thing.   
      Article One; I go through the different clauses. Article Two, Article Three, Article Four, go through the whole thing, Article Five, Article Six. Then we go through the Amendments.   
      And but I really focus on the original text of the Constitution because people have heard a lot about a lot of the individual amendments. Although, I point out some of the less the ones that aren't always discussed as much.   
      But I go through the structure because I try to explain how the structure fits together to protect individual liberty and some of the clauses about how the House of Representatives and the power of Congress and the power of the Senate, how that all fit together or the different   
       
TILLIS:  I just find it remarkable that  
KAVANAUGH:   Sorry.  
TILLIS:   in spite of your encyclopedic knowledge, that you keep it with you and you always refer back to it. And the fact that you've had it for 25 years is a testament to those cheap pocket Constitutions.  
       
KAVANAUGH:  I will I will say that when I met with Senator Feinstein, I wish she were here, but she saw this and because she talked about how much she appreciated the words of the Constitution and I pulled it out.  
      And she said, well, that looks tattered. And she she gave me a new one. So if this one ever totally falls apart and, hers has the 27th Amendment in it so if this falls apart, I told her I would use her copy for for future.  
TILLIS:  Thank you. Well, I I'm going to ask you a few other personal questions.  
      But I also, you know, I started out by saying we know where everybody was beforehand because public people made public statements. We know people want more documents, you have more time. If you have more questions, ask them and submit them for the record.  
      If you want more documents, request them because they've been in each and every case granted. Don't wait until the day before the floor to say I haven't gotten the document. When, now, you've had a running clock since August the 22nd to request some documents that were actually cleared overnight.  
      I also want to point to this, I don't understand how somebody with that kind of track record, with either judges appointed by a Democratic president and judges appointed by a Republican president on the seventh or or, on the on the district court, or the D.C. Circuit, could actually be viewed in such a divisive way. I don't see how somebody who has clearly judged on both sides of the issues here sometimes you've judged in a way that made some of my folks mad and sometimes you've judged in a way that made some of their folks mad.  
      But I think if we go back and really examine this, this has been a political exercise more than anything else. I, for one, think you should be very proud of that record. And I, for one, will not be surprised if you don't have meet or exceed that when you get on the bench.   
      And that's the last thing I want to talk about, you know, I I last night, I went through some of the cases and I kept on going through more. But folks, I mean, let's get real. Read his opinions. And the amazing thing about these opinions that I'd never read an opinion I'd I'd read a few when I was speaker, but not many.   
      I first started reading opinions when Justice Gorsuch was was in front of us. And the first thing that I was amazed with is how approachable they are. You don't have to read all the footnotes. If you're like me, you can read the summary. You get a point. You can go to some of the footnotes.  
      But read them because if you do, you'll be amazed by them. Don't judge it based on a Tweet or some sort of get out and protest; read them. John Locke, I think, said, "To prejudge other men's notions before we have looked into them is not to show their darkness but to put out our own eyes."  
      Don't put out your eyes. You may disagree, but you may want to take a look at how thoughtful all of Judge Gorsuch's 307 opinions are  
CRAPO:  Judge Kavanaugh.  
TILLIS:   I I said Gorsuch and, Judge Kavanaugh.  
       
TILLIS:  So look, just look at it. I mean, go away. I I I walked over to this convenience store to get me some Kombucha and come back here. And  
       
TILLIS:   and I was just thinking and I I talked to some people there. They apparently, they were in the audience. I think they were clearly on the other side. And they said what are you doing here? I said I'm getting a drink.  
      And I and I said, look, you know, what really bothers me is how we go into this process, and we take these incredible people and you wonder why they do it. So that's the last thing. And I told them the same thing. I said, read some of his opinions.   
      Don't believe what you've been told. Don't judge someone based on someone other's judgment. Judge them based on the on the body of work.   
      And your body of work extends long before the 12 years that you've actually been in the role of public service. And that's what I'm going to end with. I actually started public service about the same time you did, Judge Kavanaugh.   
      Actually, we have, I think, some similarities. I was a partner in a big four accounting firm. I traveled all over the place.   
      I have two kids. I coached their T-ball, their soccer. I was sometimes flying in for practice on Monday night and trying to get home on Friday night to be on the ball fields.   
      I then went into the legislature in 2011, that's really the first time I did or 2007, I should say, public service. And then became speaker of the House and came up here. And sometimes when I'm in settings like this, I ask myself the question I'm about to ask you.  
      Why on earth do you do this and why on earth do you want to do it? You're brilliant, you've augmented your God-given talents with an extraordinary education, and you've served so extraordinarily well. You know well that in the private your I mean, your potential is endless.  
      So in the remaining time and, whatever you don't use I'll yield back why on earth are you doing this?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I appreciate that. I'm doing been a judge and doing this, going through this process because, from an early age, I've tried to commit myself to public service. As I've talked about, the motto of our Jesuit high school was men for others. And that motto of public service is something I have always tried to pursue.  
      And following the example set by my mom of law. And I always found that an important way to contribute to public service.  
      And then became, of course, a a lawyer. And within public service as a lawyer, I think one of the highest forms not the only, but one of the highest forms of public service as a lawyer is to be a judge because our rule of law in this country, our rights and liberties, depend on independent, neutral impartial judges. And I thought I could contribute in that way to the public service and the and the rule of law.  
      And so I when that opportunity arose, I was honored to be considered and honored to become a judge. And I've enjoyed and been honored to do it for the last 12 years because I know that it's not abstract. It's not academic. It has real effects for real people in the real world. And being part of the process of our government, by which the rights and liberties of people are protected in the real world, was the highest form of public service.  
      At the same time, I've recognized that that's not the only way to contribute. So I've as I've mentioned before sought to teach; sought in hiring law clerks to train the next generation, teaching the Constitution; sought to volunteer with Father John in in Washington Jesuit Academy; coaching has been just an enormous part of the last seven years; and then, you know, my family.  
      So but, the the public service, as a judge, is it's a great honor and it's a great it's a great responsibility. To the discussion I just had with Senator Booker, I understand the responsibility I bear as a nominee to this court. I appreciate that.   
      I hope my experience gives me the ability to, if I were to be confirmed, to live up to that responsibility. I will give it my all, if I'm confirmed, as I've tried to do for the last 12 years. So, thank you for the question.  
TILLIS:  Judge Kavanaugh, thank you. Thank you for you for what you're going through. Thank you for your past service and what I believe is going to be a distinguished career on the bench. And God bless you and your family.  
      I yield the rest of my time.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, senator.  
GRASSLEY:  Thank you for the two minutes you didn't use.   
      Senator Harris?  
HARRIS:  Thank you. Judge, as you know these hearings are a place to hopefully get answers and as I'm sure your you've noticed your lack of a clear answer to a question I asked you last night has generated a lot of interest. I received reliable information that you had a conversation about the special counsel or his investigation with the law firm that has represented President Trump.   
      As you'll recall, last night I asked you whether you'd had such a conversation, and under oath you gave no clear answer. Then today my republican colleagues raised the issue with you, and again you said you don't recall and that you had no, "inappropriate conversations with anyone at that law firm," which has led a lot of people to believe that that was equivocal in terms of a response.   
      So whether a conversation was appropriate in your opinion is not a clear answer to my question. My colleague, Senator Blumenthal again asked you and you said you were, "pretty confident the answer was no." So frankly, if if last night you had just said no, or an absolute no even today, I think this could be put to rest.   
      But I will ask you again, and for the last time.   
      Yes, or no, have you ever been part of a conversation with lawyers at the firm of Kasowitz Benson Torres about special counsel Mueller or his investigation? And I asked were you ever part of a conversation I'm not asking you what did you say  
KAVANAUGH:  Right.  
HARRIS:  I'm asking you were you a party to a conversation that occurred regarding special counsel Mueller's investigation and a simple yes or no would suffice.  
KAVANAUGH:  About his investigation, and are you referring to a specific person?  
HARRIS:  I'm referring to a specific subject, and the specific person I'm referring to is you.  
KAVANAUGH:  Who was the conversation with? You said you had information.  
HARRIS:  That is not the subject of the question, sir.   
KAVANAUGH:  OK  
       
HARRIS:  The subject of the question is you and whether you were part of a conversation regarding special counsel Mueller's investigation?  
KAVANAUGH:   the answer the answer is no.   
HARRIS:  Thank you. And it would have been great if you could've said that last night. Thank you.  
KAVANAUGH:   well, I in my never mind.  
HARRIS:  Let's move on.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK.  
HARRIS:  Yesterday Senator Senator Blumenthal asked if you could recuse yourself in cases involving the personal, civil, or criminal liability of the president? You declined to say that you would.   
      So my question is, could a reasonable person question your independence in cases involving the president's civil or criminal liability?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm sorry, can you repeat it one more time?  
HARRIS:  Would it be reasonable for someone to question your independence in cases involving the president's civil or criminal liability should that occur?  
       
KAVANAUGH:  My independence, I believe, has been demonstrated through my 12-year record and what you've heard from the people who've worked with me. And I believe deeply in the independence of the judiciary. I rule based on the law. And you can look at cases that I've ruled against when I became a judge, against the Bush administration. And I've talked about the history of our country and the history of the Supreme Court.  
HARRIS:  And on that point, sir, particularly the history of the Supreme Court and confirmation hearings, Justice Kagan during her confirmation hearing committed to recusing in cases she handled as solicitor general. Justice Breyer committed to recusing in cases implicating his financial interests in Lloyd's of London.  
      Justice Ginsberg refused to commit to recusing in cases that were on her D.C. circuit recusal list. Justice Scalia committed at the hearing to recuse in a case implicating an issue that was the same as an issue he had decided as a D.C. circuit judge.  
      So my question to you is will you commit to recusing in any case involving the civil or criminal liability of the president who appointed you or nominated you?  
KAVANAUGH:  The independence of the judiciary requires that I not to commit to how I would decide a particular case and to issue a commitment on a discretionary recusal issue in either direction. So if I answer that question  
HARRIS:  So you think this  
KAVANAUGH:   in either direction, that would be a I would be violating my judicial independence, in my view, by committing as a in this context. I've explain  
HARRIS:  So with all due respect, sir, if I've shared with you that other nominees sitting at that desk, or some desk like that, have committed to recusing. There have been circumstances where they have committed. So is it your opinion then that they violated some ethical code or rule?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't know all the circumstances, but I believe those were situations that were required recusals where they had previously had to recuse and were simply indicating they're required recusals, but I don't know all the circumstances.  
      A discretionary recusal as a commitment to get a job or discretionary non-recusal as a commitment to get a job, either direction, would be violating my independence as a judge, as a sitting judge and as a nominee to the court.  
HARRIS:  OK. It is clear you're unwilling  
KAVANAUGH:  It it right.  
HARRIS:   at this point to to commit to recusal, so we can move on.  
      One of your mentors, Justice Kennedy wrote landmark opinions in the area of LGBTQ rights that have had a major impact on the lives of many Americans. Let's discuss one of those cases, and that's the Obergefell case. In Obergefell, as you know, the court held that same-sex couples have a right to marry. My question is whether the there Obergefell case was correctly decided, in your opinion.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, Justice Kennedy wrote the majority opinion in a series of five cases Romer v. Evans  
HARRIS:  If we can just talk about Obergefell, that'd be great.  
KAVANAUGH:  I want to explain it.  
HARRIS:  I actually know that the history leading up to Obergefell, so can you just please address your comments to Obergefell?  
KAVANAUGH:  So, I would like to explain it if I can. He wrote the majority opinion in Romer v. Evans, Lawrence v. Texas, United States v. Windsor, Obergefell and Masterpiece Cakeshop. Concluding in Masterpiece Cakeshop importantly with a statement, if I can just read this  
HARRIS:  But no, please don't because I actually have read it, and I'm sure most have. My question is very specific. Can you comment on your personal opinion on whether Obergefell was correctly decided? It's a yes or no please.  
KAVANAUGH:  In Masterpiece Cakeshop, and this is, I think, relevant to your question, Justice Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito and Justice Gorsuch and Justice Breyer and Justice Kagan, "The days of discriminating against gay and lesbian Americans or treating gay and lesbian Americans as inferior in dignity and worth are over." They are paraphrasing.  
HARRIS:  Are over, right. Do you agree with that statement?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is the press and the Supreme Court agreed with by  
HARRIS:  Sir, I'm asking your opinion.  
KAVANAUGH:  I  
HARRIS:  You're the nominee right now and so it it is probative of your ability to serve on the highest court in our land. So I'm asking a very specific question. If you're willing to answer or not and if you're not willing to answer it, we can move on. But do you believe Obergefell was correctly decided?  
KAVANAUGH:  So each of the justices have declined as a matter of judicial independence, each of them to answer questions and not line of cases.  
HARRIS:  So you will not answer that question?  
KAVANAUGH:  The following the precedent said by those eight justices they've all declined  
HARRIS:  Thank you.  
KAVANAUGH:   when asked to answer that question.  
HARRIS:  I have limited time so  
KAVANAUGH:  But it's important that  
HARRIS:   I'd really like to move on. You've said that Brown, the Board of Education was one of the greatest moments in the court's history. Do you believe that Obergefell was also one of those moments?  
KAVANAUGH:  I've said, Senator, consistent with what the nominees have done that the the vast swath of modern case law, as Justice Kagan put it, you can't as a nominee in this seat give a thumbs up or thumbs down. That was that's her word.  
HARRIS:  Do you think that Obergefell was one of the great moments in the history of the Supreme Court of the United States?  
KAVANAUGH:  And for that reason, those nominees have declined to comment on recent cases, all of them.  
HARRIS:  It's been a great moment is what I'm asking you, not to comment on the the legal analysis. Do you believe that was a great moment in the history of the court?  
KAVANAUGH:  So the Justice Kennedy wrote the majority opinion saying, "The days of treating gay and lesbian Americans or gay and lesbian couples as second class citizens who are inferior in dignity and worth .  
HARRIS:  Yeah.  
KAVANAUGH:   are over in the Supreme Court." That's a very important statement, Senator.  
HARRIS:  I agree, that's why I think you repeated it. Thank you. Let's move on. Over the last several months, we have all witnessed the inhumane and heartbreaking separation of immigrant children from their families by this administration. Despite a court order, requiring the administration to reunite them over a month ago, nearly 500 immigrant children are still separated from their parents. Do you believe that constitutional rights of parents, specifically fundamental due process rights, are implicated in such family separations?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, that is a matter of pending litigation, I believe. And as a sitting judge on the D.C. circuit or as a nominee, of course, I can't comment.  
HARRIS:  Have you watched the coverage of any of these cases on television or have you read about the experiences those parents and those children have had?  
KAVANAUGH:  I have seen some television.  
HARRIS:  In the 1889 Chinese exclusion case, the Supreme Court permitted a ban on Chinese people entering the United States. The court said Chinese people are, quote, "impossible to assimilate with our people," end quote, and said they were immigrating in numbers, quote, "approaching an invasion." This case has never been explicitly overruled. You've said you'd be willing to talk about older cases, so can you tell me was the United States Supreme Court correct in holding that Chinese people could be banned from entering our country?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the cases in the 1890's, as you know  
HARRIS:  1889 to be specific.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK, and that era reflects discriminatory attitudes by the Supreme Court. Of course, that's the era also of Plessy v. Ferguson.  
HARRIS:  So would you be willing to say that that was incorrectly decided?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I don't want to opine on a case a particular case without looking at it and and studying with the the discrimination.  
HARRIS:  Are you aware that that case has not been overturned?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I know that with a number of the cases like Korematsu, let's let me use that as an example  
HARRIS:  Which we've discussed earlier, but in this case, in particular, were you aware that it had not been overturned?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I I realize that there are still cases of in the immigration context.  
HARRIS:  Have you ever written about any of those cases and and your thoughts about whether they should be re-examined or potentially overturned, and sometimes obviously they should be overturned?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, there is a swath of cases.  
HARRIS:  Have you talked about this case ever?  
KAVANAUGH:  I do not I do not believe. I'm happy to be refreshed if if you have something that suggests I had.  
HARRIS:  No, it's actually a question.  
KAVANAUGH:  OK.  
HARRIS:  And under the constitution, Judge, do you believe that Congress or the president can ban entry into the United States on the basis of race?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, that was the of course, one of the issues that was just in litigation and there's still litigation about the immigration laws and how exclusions  
HARRIS:  You're not going to answer that.  
KAVANAUGH:  I I that's pending litigation, so I think I as a matter of independence and precedent  
HARRIS:  Will not answer that, that's fine. Let's move on. In 2013, Texas passed a law that impose new restrictions on health care facilities that provide abortions. The effect was that after the law was passed, half those facilities closed, which severely limited access to health care for the women of Texas.  
      In 2016, Whole Woman's Health was decided wherein the Supreme Court invalidated the Texas restrictions. Was Whole Woman's Health correctly decided, yes or no? And we can keep it short and move on.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, consistent with the approach of nominee  
HARRIS:  You will not be answering that.  
KAVANAUGH:   following that nominee precedent.  
HARRIS:  OK. I'd like to ask you another question, which I believe you can answer. You've said repeatedly that Roe v. Wade is an important precedent. I'd like to understand what that really means for the lives of women. We've had a lot of conversations about how the discussion we're having in this room will impact real people out there.  
      And so my question is what, in your opinion, is still unresolved? For example, can a state prevent a woman from using the most common or widely accepted medical procedure determining her pregnancy? Do you believe that that is still an unresolved issue? I'm not asking how you would decide it.  
KAVANAUGH:  So I don't want to comment on hypothetical cases. Roe v. Wade is an important precedent. It has been reaffirmed many times.  
HARRIS:  So are you willing to say that it would be unconstitutional for a state to play such a restriction on women  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator  
HARRIS:   per Roe v. Wade?  
KAVANAUGH:   you can the process in the Supreme Court was Roe was reaffirmed in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, of course, and that's precedent on precedent. And there are a lot of cases applying the undue burden standard. And and those themselves are important precedence, and I had to apply them.  
HARRIS:  And we've discussed that many times. I have actually  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
HARRIS:   had the benefit of sitting through most of the hours of your testimony in the last two days.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you.  
HARRIS:  I know you've talked a lot about that. Can Congress ban abortions nationwide after 20 weeks of pregnancy?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, that's it would require me to comment on potential legislation that I understand, and therefore I I shouldn't as a matter of judicial independence following the precedent of the other  
HARRIS:  OK.  
KAVANAUGH:   nominees do that.  
HARRIS:  And. that was on I'm going to ask you about on enumerated rights. So, you gave a speech praising former Justice Rehnquist dissent in robes. There's been much discussion about that. And you wrote, quote, "Celebrating his success that success is stemming the general tide of freewheeling judicial creation of unenumerated rights." That is what you said in celebration of Justice Rehnquist.  
      So, unenumerated rights is a phrase that lawyers use, but I want to make clear what we're talking about. It means rights that are protected by the constitution even if they're not specifically mentioned in the constitution  
KAVANAUGH:  Right.  
HARRIS:   so they're not in that book that you carry. So, what we're talking about is the right to vote. That's an unenumerated right. The right to have children, the right to control the upbringing of your children, the right to refuse medical care, the right to love the partner of your choice, the right to marry, and the right to have an abortion.  
      Now, putting those unenumerated rights in the context of the statement you made, which was to praise the stemming of the general tide of freewheeling creation of unenumerated rights, which means you were the interpretation there is you were praising the the the quest to end those unenumerated rights. My question to you is which of the rights that I just mentioned do you want to put an end to or roll back?  
KAVANAUGH:  Three points, I believe, Senator. First, the constitution, it is in the book that I carry. The constitution protects unenumerated rights. That's what the Supreme Court has said.  
HARRIS:  But that does not explicitly protect the rights that I just listed in. And we both know that that's the case.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right, so that's point one. Point two Glucksberg, the case you're referring to, specifically cited Planned Parenthood v. Casey as authority in that case. So Casey reaffirmed Roe. Casey is cited as authority in Glucksberg. That's point two. And point three, Justice Kagan, when she sat in this chair, pointed repeatedly the Glucksberg as the test for recognizing unenumerated rights going forward. I in describing the precedent, I agree with her description of that in her hearing.  
HARRIS:  So, thank you for that. So then let's put the rights that I mentioned, which are unenumerated in the context of your praise of Justice Rehnquist as having stemmed the general tide of freewheeling judicial creation of unenumerated rights. Arguably, every right that I mentioned on that list was a judicially created unenumerated right. And my question then is when you praise a jurist who attempted to end those rights, which rights in particular do you believe are praise-worthy of ending?  
KAVANAUGH:  Right. So that was the test that was set forth by the Supreme Court going forward for recognition of additional unenumerated rights. That was cited as authority in that case, Planned Parenthood v. Casey, which reaffirmed Roe. The point  
HARRIS:  So let's talk about the right to vote. Do you believe that that falls in the category of of having been caught up in the general tide of freewheeling judicial creation of unenumerated rights?  
KAVANAUGH:  What what I was describing with Chief Justice Rehnquist, and it was a description of his career, it was in a variety of areas and his role  
HARRIS:  Specifically a reference was to unenumerated rights, OK.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right. And in a number of areas, I described five different areas of his jurisprudence where it helped the Supreme Court achieve what I think has been a common sense middle ground that has stood the test of of time in terms of precedent in a variety of areas. At least that's how others have described it.  
      The Glucksberg case, as Justice Kagan explained when she was in this chair, is the case that the Supreme Court has relied on for forward-looking future recognition of unenumerated rights. It did not  
HARRIS:  Thank you, Sir. I'm familiar with that. I think you're not going to address the specific enumerated rights or are you? Because if not we can move on.  
KAVANAUGH:  I think I've addressed it. Thank you, Senator.  
HARRIS:  OK. In 2011 you were a judge on one of the challenges to the Affordable Care Act. The court you sat upon held there you dissented on the procedural grounds on on the the court which upheld the act. One of your former law clerks described your opinion in that case and that's the Seven-Sky case as quote, "a thorough takedown of the individual mandate." He would go on to clerk for Supreme Court Justice Kennedy that year or the next year, and the Supreme Court then held or heard the challenge to the Affordable Care Act. And according to him, your opinion was, quote, "a roadmap for the dissenting justices, the ones who would have struck down the Affordable Care Act."  
      Given you wrote the, quote, "roadmap," according to your law clerk, could one reasonably conclude that you would have voted to strike down the Affordable Care Act had you been on the Supreme Court?  
KAVANAUGH:  A couple of points, Senator. First, I concluded, in one case, I upheld the Affordable Care Act against an origination clause challenge. In the case you're referring to, I did not reach the merits, but I discussed the merits pro that were being argued in both directions. My opinion has been described as the roadmap for both sides because I described both positions. And actually it wasn't a roadmap at all because I didn't reach  
HARRIS:  He also said that it's a takedown.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I I speak for myself and my own opinion speak for themselves and with my  
HARRIS:  Does that align them? And I'm sure that the Chairman wants to close this questioning so we can leave it with that. I thank you, Judge.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right. Thank you for your time, Senator.  
GRASSLEY:  Before I call on Senator Cornyn, the the minority has requested a third round of questions, and that's perfectly legitimate to me. Maybe you're a day longer, Judge, but we did the same thing in the Gorsuch hearing. We've agreed to eight-minute rounds. Senator Leahy has given his additional eight minutes to Senator Hirono also; she will have 16 minutes. And then we will all go to our traditional closed session down in the regular committee room 226 that we've already discussed.  
      So, two things I need to need to know. Would you like to have a few minutes for me if you would like to respond to some of the issues my colleagues raised including recusal from any cases involving the Mueller investigation, your opinion or response to whether Obergefell was correctly decided and about a Whole Woman's Health issues that due process rights of family separation, any of those things that you didn't get a chance to explain you want to explain?  
KAVANAUGH:  No, that's OK, Mr. Chairman. I think we had a good dialogue.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. Then one other thing. Would you like when we get done with Cornyn before we start the third round because that adds up to about 80 minutes, assuming none of you guys want to talk, and I hope you don't want to.  
       
      Would you like to have a 2.5-minute break or a quick 10-minute break or  
      
KAVANAUGH:  I can go I can go five, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. When Senator Cornyn is done we'll take a five-minute break.  
CORNYN:  Mr. Chairman, this side may have a few pearls of wisdom, too.  
GRASSLEY:  Well, OK.  
CORNYN:  But yeah, no, I take your point.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. Well, let me explain.  
       
GRASSLEY:  I would not I would not want to cut anybody off if they get really warmed up about something.  
       
CORNYN:  Mr. Chairman, I have in my hand a description of a series of letters and editorials. I'd like to ask those letters and editorials described in this stock be made part of the record.  
GRASSLEY:  Without objection, so ordered.  
CORNYN:  So, Judge, we have a lot of things going on here today and yesterday, I think you'll agree. One of the things that bothers me a little bit is the suggestion that some Americans can participate in the political debates and others should be demonized and be condemned sort of guilt by association. And we've heard in particular you being criticized and the federalist society in particular being criticized for participating in the judicial selection process, debating legal issues, social issues and the like.  
      But and I and I recall my friend from Minnesota talked about the Brennan Center. She referred to it as a nonpartisan group. I wouldn't call it that. I'd call it a left-leaning aggressive group just like I would call NARAL, the Alliance for Justice, Sierra Club, Emily's List and others. I mentioned all of those because each of those organizations and our members have weighed in on the important topic of your confirmation.  
      And I just think it's well, it reminds me a little bit of Joseph McCarthy talk about one of the dark periods of the Senate's history after in the Red Scare of the 1950's he was known for asking, "Were you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party?" And he was appropriately admonished and ultimately left the Senate because he made irresponsible allegations in public against innocent people. But the idea that we would somehow disparage Americans for their associations and somehow disparage their right to express themselves in a matter of public interest like the confirmation of a Supreme Court justice strikes me as a bad road to go down. That's not a question, that's a statement.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, Sir.  
CORNYN:  I want to I'd I found this hearing, I hope you have  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, Sir.  
CORNYN:   to be edifying in a number of ways. It's not always pretty, it's like democracy itself. Sometimes it gets pretty messy, but that's what we do here in the Senate. We make sausage and or we give those who make sausage a bad name sometimes by what we do here. But this is democracy. This is the people people's representatives in action advocating on their behalf different points of view. And the ultimate decisionmaker in all this, of course, is the American people, and that's as it should be.  
      But one of the things that Senator Crapo and Senator Sasse and others have raised during the course of this hearing is the role of administrative agencies in our government. First of all, where there any administrative agencies at the founding of America?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, in the First Congress they created a secretary Department of War and the Foreign Affairs, Treasury, so there were a few departments created at the beginning of the Republic. But but obviously those were ones of core executive functions and has more and so those are the ones at the beginning. But I see your point not not anything approaching the number of agencies now.  
CORNYN:  Well, that's very helpful. I hadn't really thought about those as being administrative agencies, but they certainly are departments of government  
KAVANAUGH:  Yeah.  
CORNYN:  They would issue regulations and rules that essentially what we see today when administrative agencies issue rules and regulations, they have the force of law, do they not?  
KAVANAUGH:  They do, Senator.  
CORNYN:  And we don't get to vote on the bureaucrats who occupy those agencies, do we?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, for the independent agencies, of course, the they operate with four clause protection. The executive agencies are appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the Senate, the principal executive officers. They are not elected. As to your point, they're not elected.  
CORNYN:  Well, one of the things that I think is part of the genius of our representative government is the fact that those of us who do make policy or run for election, and we can either be voted into office or voted out of office. But when it comes to administrative agencies, the American people do not have that choice, do they?  
KAVANAUGH:  They are not elected. That's that's correct, Sir.  
CORNYN:  And so what I want to talk to you about briefly here is just the growth of the administrative of the administrative agencies in our government and the fact that over time an enormous body of decision-making has been delegated from the elected representatives of the people of Congress to these administrative agencies that issue voluminous rules and regulations, which have the force of law.  
      And to the comments made by some of my colleagues more eloquently than I'm making them, Congress is delegating more and more responsibility to them and accepted less and less responsibility to make the hard judgments that ultimately we will be held accountable for at the ballot box. And I want to just talk to you a little bit about we talked about the Chevron case, and you explain that. I'll come back to that in a minute.  
      But if if a community bank or credit union in Austin, Texas, their regulatory agencies that govern them and audit them and the and the like, they have they issue regulations and rules thinking basically penalize or otherwise punish those community banks and credit unions in Austin Texas, can't they?  
KAVANAUGH:  That that is correct in terms of establishing rules and then being able to bring enforcement action sometimes that are brought before administrative law judges subject to sometimes deferential judicial review.  
CORNYN:  And because of the Administrative Procedure Act that Senator Crapo talked about and because we presume that these administrative agencies have expertise that courts do not, there is deference afforded to the fact-finding and the legal conclusions on the application of those rules to contested cases, correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is correct. That is a concern that I've identified in some of my cases about fact-finding and the fact that sometimes it appears not always to live up to the two-process requirements. It's something I've identified in a few cases. It is a part of our it's a part of our administrative system so I'm talking about specific cases where I've ruled that. In that specific case, there was a problem with how the adjudication was conducted.  
CORNYN:  And if the courts will defer under the Administrative Procedures Act and under that body of law to the fact-finding by an administrative agency, and the court say, well, unless it's unless it's arbitrary and capricious or some similar standard, they're going to let it stand. There is really no recourse for an individual even in a court of law if, in fact, what that agency has done has a has made an erroneous decision in all circumstances, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That can that can be correct.  
CORNYN:  I know it's a little bit we're getting to a little bit of complexity here and there some nuance associated, but you could get my drift.  
KAVANAUGH:  Your your general description is right. I've been very in the weeds sometimes in cases involving individuals in in administrative adjudications where we've had judicial review because I know those are the cases where individual lives and liberty and property. The Rossello case was a good example where the the woman was denied Social Security benefits based on a because for her disability because of a claim that she had had employment at some point even though she really had it, gone on for 15 years. And I was very stern, I would say, in the opinion I wrote in that case about how that was inconsistent with basic due process and the law.  
      And so I've been every case matters, of course. But the cases with individuals who seemed to have gotten the runaround from the government are cases where, I think, judicial review is especially important. That can be criminal defendants. That can be in an administrative adjudications, whoever it is, you want to make sure they're getting treated fairly under the law.  
CORNYN:  And I don't know what happened in the case of the woman you described. But in some instances, even after the agency makes a decision, if you want to appeal the decision of that agency, they tell you to go next door and talk to another employee of the same agency and state your grounds for appeal, hardly due process in my regard. Is that generally a concern about whether there is an independent review process even within an administrative agency?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is a issue many have raised. This concerns the Supreme Court since Crowell v. Benson has upheld the general concept of administrative adjudication. But whether it's Article 3 adjudication or administrative adjudication and we're reviewing it, we need to make sure that people's due process rights are being respected.  
CORNYN:  Well, it just strikes me that given the explosion of administrative agencies and the people that work for them the explosion of regulations that Congress never passes on and that the courts are by doctrine, by precedent, deferential to both the finding of fact and the conclusions of law under the Chevron doctrine, then there is a lot of room for a lot of abuse and a lot of individuals or strike me as the the the frustration they feel that their government is no longer responsive to them is very real and a serious issue.  
      But now it's getting to the Chevron case, it strikes me and I made I may not get this right. You'll correct me if I'm wrong. But basically where Congress is ambiguous on the grant of authority to an administrative agency, the court will defer to the agency in the interpretation of its own legal authority if if it's a reasonable conclusion. Is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  That that is a correct description of the Chevron doctrine.  
CORNYN:  I got lucky, I guess.  
       
      But my point is why in the world would an agency be able to determine their own legal authority? I mean, given the other concerns we have about a lack of accountability, a lack of due process, would the courts then say, but we're going to let them define the scope of their own legal authority where they can act and we're going to defer to them. Why in the world would the courts do that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, that that is one of the critiques that's been leveled at Chevron. One of the things that's important, I believe, is to recognize Chevron itself I hate to get in the weeds, but footnote 9 of Chevron is very important in terms of using all the tools of statutory construction before you make a finding of ambiguity in the statutory term at issue or or otherwise. And I think that's important for courts to take seriously.  
      As I've pointed out, the ambiguity finding is sufficiently uncertain that that is, in my view, as I've written intention with the notion of the judge as neutral umpire and something that's been of concern to me, there's also the major questions exception, major rules exception to the Chevron doctrine that I've written about.  
CORNYN:  Well, I'm I'm certainly not going to ask you on how you might rule in the future case, but this has been identified by legal scholars and by judges of all description and orientation as a as a serious issue that maybe need to be revisited in the future. And I'll just like I did with our Santa Fe School District case, I'll just express my own frustration with that. But especially when you compound it with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau whether where Congress insulated the bureau from any sort of oversight by Congress and where they appointed ahead of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau with cast powers to get into the personal financial information of every American and give them really more authority than any that we would ever give any of our intelligence agencies is just strikes me as a a tremendous abuse of power. Again, it's not a question, but I will use the opportunity to express a frustration I know Senator Crapo, as the chairman of the Banking Committee, shares with me.  
      In the five minutes I have left, let me ask you a softball question.  
       
      Cameras in the courtroom, one of the reasons why I think these confirmation hearings, as painful as they are to the nominee and their family and friends, are so important is I think more people in America have learned about how their government should operate and does operate by watching the last two days and you in the in the dock than they have through all their time in elementary school, high junior high school, and high school and college, most Americans don't really study American history anymore much less civics, and so I think this is a wonderful opportunity. And I'm glad your your your students, your your team are here on the front row may be listening to a few things because I think this is really important.  
      If Americans are going to accept responsibility for their government and if they're going to hold public officials accountable for performing their responsibilities according to the constitution, they need to be able to understand the sorts of issues we've been talking about here today, and they need to get involved and express themselves. So, to me, cameras in the courtroom I know are controversial on the Supreme Court. I will tell you and you know you know this already. Many state courts, for example, the Texas Supreme Court has a fixed camera in the corner that never moves, and everybody forgets it's there and nobody grandstands, and they have oral arguments, and the judges do their thing and ask questions. The lawyers give answers. And I think it's another great opportunity for people to see their government in action.  
      And I know the Supreme Court, no cameras in the courtroom. You maybe pay have a very nice artist rendition of your oral argument. I was given a copy of mine. My staff when I argued the case, we talked about, and my staff said, "Well, if we paid $50, it'll take five years and 10 pounds off." And I said, "Thank you. Money well spent."  
      But the point is I think the American people would learn an awful lot by seeing the Supreme Court in action. And I applaud the the action that your court and others have taken to make that more accessible with recordings and the like, but I would hope that that the court would continue to look at the possibility that more and more of its activities would be available to the American people because not everybody can go across the street and get a nice seat in that wonderful marble palace over there and see the court in action. I think they would be odd, I think they would be impressed, and I think they would learn a lot about how the courts do operate and should operate in our system of government.  
      So I know OJ the OJ Simpson trial I'm showing my age here gave cameras in the courtroom a bad name. And certainly some of the activities we see at hearings like this where people know they're going to be on TV camera, encourage them to misbehave and disrupt. That maybe the cost of doing business sometimes. I'm confident that the court could control that much better than we in Congress can. But I just like to take a couple of minutes to to comment on that and how how should how should the judiciary look at this great opportunity to inform and educate the American people about how their government works and certainly the judiciary, and what the risks you see each of the litigants and to the to the fair administration of Justice.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, thank you. First, you mentioned that this use the word "painful," for me this has been a great honor to be here, the greatest honor and for my family to be here. I've enjoyed the discussions with all the Senators on the Committee. I've enjoyed and it's continuing I know, and I've enjoyed the the 65 meetings. I know this is not my last comment, but I've enjoyed the 65 meetings. I've enjoyed the hearing. It's a great honor.  
      As I've said repeatedly, I'm on the sunrise side of the mountain. I'm an optimist. I see I'm positive about the future of the judiciary. I'm positive and optimistic about the future of the country. We're always forming a more perfect union seeking to fulfill the promises of the constitution. To be here is a great honor.  
      If you you mentioned the people watching, if there's one thing they take away, I hope they understand that an independent judiciary is the crown jewel of our constitutional republic, in my view, and that the judiciary has been, must be and must continue to be independent of politics that we don't make the policy decisions. We do the best we can to decide the law under the precedent and laws the precedent of the Supreme Court, the laws passed by Congress.  
      I to your point about cameras, I view it as of vital importance, going for vital importance to make maintain the confidence of all Americans, all Americans in the independence and impartiality of the judiciary. And I know how concerns and focus concerns focus Chief Justice Roberts is on maintaining confidence in all of the justices on the Supreme Court, maintaining the confidence of all the American people in the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law in the United States of America. And I understand that. I understand the responsibility I bear as a nominee, and if confirmed as a justice to do everything I can in everything I do to maintain confidence in the independence of the judiciary going forward.  
      I do agree with you when you watch an oral argument in the Supreme Court, you see the justices in action grappling with cases. It is inspiring to see them in action. Grappling, as I've said, not on sitting on different sides of an aisle, not seeing in different rooms as one group seeking as best they can to get the right answer under the precedent laws of the United States. It is inspiring and it is something.  
      If I am fortunate enough to be there that I'll do I'll give it my all to live up to that responsibility. As I said to Senator Booker, I understand the responsibility. I would bear if I were on that court, and I would do everything I can to live up to it and maintain it.  
      As the cameras, consistent with what I've said, I have an open mind on that. I've seen the benefits of live audio, but I would want to listen first, listen to the eight justices who are there and then have thought about it and have experienced it. But I have an open mind, and I will leave with close with this, I want to do everything I can as I said to the Chairman to maintain confidence of the American people all the American people in the independence and impartiality of the judiciary.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. We'll take a five-minute break.  
       
GRASSLEY:  Judge, I apologize to you. I'm the one that didn't get back here on time. OK. I think we'll start with Senator Durbin with your eight minutes right now. What's well, I I didn't if she wants to first she can, but I'd like to have somebody start. Why don't you take a couple of minutes right now just to use up two of your minutes? I don't think she'll care. Go ahead.  
       
DURBIN:  You're going to have to represent me in this. Well, is she here?  
      
DURBIN:  All right. Judge, thank you very much. I have a granddaughter who's going in the second grade. And she came home from school first grade last year and to tell her mom that there have been an instruction from the teacher about what to do in her first grade classroom if a shooter came into their school. She was told to get on the floor and stay away from the windows.  
      Her mom called me in tears and said, "I can't believe it's come to this that in the first grade, we get to warn our kids about shooters coming into schools." But we know we do. And I talked to Senator Blumenthal and Senator Murphy about the tragedy of Sandy Hook and so many other tragedies. That's why I want to spend a moment talking about the Second Amendment here because you've taken a position on the Second Amendment, which you yourself have described as a lonely voice. You've taken a position, which I don't believe is responsible from a public safety viewpoint.  
      You laid out your text to history and tradition test for reviewing Second Amendment challenges the gun laws in your dissent in the D.C. circuit court Heller case. Your test would have courts ignore the public safety impact of laws and instead search to see if the laws had historic analogs.  
      In a March 31, 2016 speech to American Enterprise Institute you said, quote, "I thought Justice Scalia said pretty clearly what the test is, that history and tradition-based approach. I've been a lonely voice in reading Heller that way," end of quote. Indeed, Judge, I'm not aware of any circuit that follows your test, the history and tradition test. They all apply intermediate or strict scrutiny and asked basic questions about public safety.  
      In the 2011 Heller case, the two judges in the majority, the D.C. circuit, both Republicans I might add, said this about your lone dissent. Unlike our dissenting colleague, we read Heller straightforwardly. Now a lonely voice can can note that you are inspiring, insightful or brave. It might also connote that you're just plain wrong. And in this situation, it's a life or death test whether it's an assault weapon or the person who can buy it or use it, I need to know from you how you can reconcile your position with your opening statement to this committee.  
      Remember what you told us? The rule of common sense. The rule of common sense suggests to me that you would not be a lone voice or an issue of life and death involving innocent Americans. Common sense would suggest that you were joined with Justice Scalia and other federal courts who believe that scrutiny, which involves public safety should be the test.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, thank you. It's not my test, it's my interpretation of the Supreme Court's tests. My in my opening statement, I emphasize precedent. It's all about precedent.  
DURBIN:  So alone, you're alone. You've admitted you're alone.  
KAVANAUGH:  Not anymore.  
DURBIN:  the same case others have read and come out with a completely different solution saying, "I'm just following the precedent."  
KAVANAUGH:  Many other judges, since I gave that talk, have agreed with the approach I set forth in that case. But but the important thing is I'd the opinion speaks for itself. It goes through in painstaking detail. The Heller case for the Supreme Court authored by Justice Scalia and then the McDonald's case authored by Justice Alito and explains that the exceptions to the individual right protected by the Second Amendment are laid out in part three of the Supreme Court's Heller opinion.  
      You mentioned intermediate or strict scrutiny. I said specifically, in my opinion, that the history and tradition test may allow some additional regulations than strict scrutiny tests, so in terms of comparing how much to your point gun regulation is permissible, I made that explicit point and might  
DURBIN:  But what is the common sense rule that you stressed in your opening statement? At a time when so many innocent people are being killed with guns, I suggest that we ought to be mindful that the Second Amendment is not a suicide pact. We ought to make America safe and to find the construction of this, which sets you apart from those who are looking to public safety as a standard is a troubling thing. I I'm sure that some groups I'm not going to name names, you know what I'm talking about, applaud your position.  
      But I would just say from the viewpoint of parents and families and people worried about gun safety, why do you set yourself aside from the mainstream of thinking on this?  
KAVANAUGH:  Because that's how I read the precedent of the Supreme Court as best I could. I specifically talked about at the end of that opinion, too, as well the real world consequences. I was very aware of the real world consequences. I'm very aware of the drills that are done in the schools these days. I'm very aware that I lived in the D.C. area, which was known as the murder capital of the world for a time in the 1980's with mostly handgun violence. I am very attentive to that issue.  
      At the same time, I am a judge. My duty, as I've explained repeatedly, is to follow the constitution as interpreted by the Supreme Court. I explained in as much detail as I possibly could how I analyze Justice Scalia's majority opinion and Justice Alito's plurality opinion in McDonald. They, as I read them, seem to reject the balancing test that have been articulated in Justice Breyer's dissenting opinions in both cases. I explained that in detail.  
      It's important to underscore the Supreme Court said and I said following that machine guns can be banned.  
DURBIN:  That's been the case since 1930's.  
KAVANAUGH:  But I I just want to reiterate, machine guns can be banned under the Supreme Court precedent.  
DURBIN:  Thank goodness.  
KAVANAUGH:  And that's what our and and so, too, the Supreme Court said traditional walls such as felon in possession laws, concealed carry laws are permissible, bans on possession by mentally-ill, bans on possession of guns in schools and government buildings, all of those were articulated by the Supreme Court as permissible regulations. And those are some of the regulations that has traditionally existed.  
      But I understand and I'm aware of what you're talking about in terms of schools and I understand the drills and, of course, detest  
DURBIN:  Common sense.  
KAVANAUGH:   gun gun violence.  
DURBIN:  Rules of common sense. Last question I have for you is this, when the President introduced you as his nominee, you said, "Throughout this process I have witnessed firsthand," you said this to the President, "I have witnessed firsthand your appreciation for the vital role of the American judiciary." What did you witness about this President's appreciation for the vital role of the judiciary/  
KAVANAUGH:  I witnessed his discussion with me in my interview, his discussion with me the night he announced me at the White House, his discussion on that Sunday night. When he when I went to the White House, he and Mrs. Trump met with me in his discussion of the judiciary with me, what I have to what I based that judgment on was my interactions with him on the Monday, on the Sunday and on the Monday.  
DURBIN:  We usually instruct juries not to put their life experience and common sense aside when they make a verdict. And I think the verdict on this president and his vital role of the judiciary would include more than those meetings. Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  In between, any any Democratic or Republican wants recognition has or otherwise, Senator Hatch?  
HATCH:  Let me just ask one question. Let me just ask one question, too. You told Senator Durbin earlier that, quote, "We are all equal before the law in the United States of America," unquote. And yesterday, you said that, quote, no matter where you come from, no matter how rich you are, no matter your race, your gender, no matter your stage in life, no matter your position in government, it's all equal justice under the law," unquote. So, in your opinion, what does equal justice under the law mean to you?  
KAVANAUGH:  Equal justice under the law means that every American, every every citizen, everyone who ends up in an American court is entitled to equal treatment, due process, equal protection. Your argument will prevail on the facts in the law in a particular case not  
      
KAVANAUGH:   not based on the identity of the parties or the litigants, not based on policy views. And that's a critical foundation of the rule of law in the United States of the independence and impartial judiciary that we hold dear in the United States.  
DURBIN:  Thank you, Judge. That's all I care to ask.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Feinstein?  
FEINSTEIN:  Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. If I don't use all my time, I'd like to see cede what remains to Senator Cruz.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator, that that will be done, yes.  
FEINSTEIN:  Thanks. Judge, you have very expansive views on presidential power, and they're not limited whether the president can be checked by Congress or the courts. I think you believe that sitting president cannot be indicted, cannot be prosecuted, cannot be investigated and should have the authority to fire a special counsel at will.  
      It's my understanding in 2016 you told the American Enterprise Institute that you will put the final nail into the, I guess, coffin of the independent counsel. Would you comment on that please?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, thank you. The nail on the independent counsel statute was put in by Congress in 1999 when Congress overwhelmingly decided not to reauthorize the law as a as a general matter. In terms of executive power, I I would just urge we haven't discussed a few issues here today, but my opinion on the political question doctrine in El-Shifa, my opinion my article on national security, my book review of Judge David Behrens' book, my mens rea opinion dissent in Burwell joined by Judge Tatel, my administrative law, the Harvard Law Review piece.  
      If you just read those four pieces, just read those four pieces just read those four pieces. I think you understand that I'm not someone who has an unduly expansive view that I'm one who has applied held the executive to account the Executive Branch to account in a number of different areas consistent with our constitutional structure.  
      Those are important. So, if you have if you're just going to read a few things, just read those four things and I think you'll understand my understanding of how executive power and legislative power interact.  
       
FEINSTEIN:  OK. In 2003, while you were in the White House Counsel's office, the Supreme Court decided to hear two cases involving the University of Michigan's efforts to increase racial diversity. The Bush administration filed briefs in the Michigan case arguing that the University of Michigan's programs were unconstitutional.  
      Senator Booker asked you about this. So, please tell me, what was your view on whether the Bush administration should oppose the University of Michigan's efforts to increase racial diversity on the campus and do you support using race as one factor in admission to college or universities to achieve racial diversity on campuses?  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Senator. This was an issue on which the existing precedent of the Supreme Court and President Bush's views in my view dovetailed.  
      I was working for President Bush. He was interested in promoting racial diversity. He had said this much as governor of Texas, that was his position as President of The United States.  
      He believed also, and this is consistent with Supreme Court precedent as well I believe in using race-neutral means first to see if that in Texas, the top 10 percent plan in the wake of the Hopwood decision in 1996. Governor then Governor Bush had been part of that.  
      He always talked about the importance of diversity and in the Michigan case, he insisted that the brief filed by the administration reflect his position that promoting racial diversity was to be important goal for his administration.  
FEINSTEIN:  OK. Let me ask you a question on employment discrimination involving the LGBT community and this is a while back. On July 11, 2001, you received an e-mail from your White House colleague Brad Berenson who wrote that you were a walking point on faith-based issues.  
      You replied to him that you had, and i quote, "mapped out a preliminary strategy" to respond to concerns raised about the Bush administration's policies allowing federal funding to go to religious organizations that discriminate against LGBT individuals.  
      Could you describe your involvement in Bush administration's efforts to exempt charities from state and local laws prohibiting employment discrimination against LGBT individuals?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, thank you. I don't recall the specifics but I do know that one of President Bush's initiatives when he came into office in 2001 was an office of faith-based initiatives. He was very focused on making sure that religious organizations could participate as equals, not as preferred, but as equals in American society and that was something that the faith-based initiatives office worked on and something he was very focused on.  
      I don't remember the details of  

KAVANAUGH:  I don't remember the details of particular of that particular but I do know that President Bush at the same time, I also did speak to on occasion to the Log Cabin Republicans, which was a group that we that I talked to about judicial nominations as I recall and President Bush is someone who believe deeply as he said repeatedly equality for all Americans.  
FEINSTEIN:  Did were you involved in the discussion of any other action to permit employment discrimination against LGBT persons?  
KAVANAUGH:  Employment discrimination? I don't recall anything specific on that, Senator.  
FEINSTEIN:  OK. That's all I have.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. Senator Coons will have another 1 minute and 22 seconds. any Republican wants the floor. Senator Kennedy?  
KENNEDY:  OK.  
      Nothing.  
      
KENNEDY:  Thank you.  
       
      My office is now going to be moved to Arlington. Judge, real quickly, yesterday, you we talked about originalism and you defined that as constitutional textualism and what counts according to the Supreme Court in interpreting the United States Constitution and the Bill of Rights is the public understanding of the document, what the words meant at that time they were drafted and approved.  
      And you pointed if I get this wrong, stop me. And you pointed out that the intent, the intent of the delegates was not something that should be focused on. There were 55 delegates about 55 delegates to the convention.  
KAVANAUGH:  Originally.  
KENNEDY:  Originally. They obviously didn't move in lockstep. Delegates, senators, congressmen, congresswomen have a multitude of reasons for voting as they do. That's why we focus on the public understanding, which is sort of an objective, reasonable person's standard, right? Am I in the ball park?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's correct.  
KENNEDY:  OK. So, here's my question, why then I'm not suggesting we shouldn't, I'm just curious, why then do we put so much emphasis on the Federalist papers or for that matter, the anti-Federalist papers when you're only getting the point of view of one person?  
KAVANAUGH:  That's a great question and we should be careful when we look at the Federalist papers. It's a great document. Those papers describe the structure of government in magnificent ways, but they were an advocacy piece to try to convince people in ratifying convention and ratifying convention to vote yes on the draft constitution.  
      So, sometimes as with everything else, that's an advocacy piece. We have to be careful to make sure that the words control and not necessarily an advocacy piece about the document and there were lots of statements in ratifying conventions as well.  
      This was a compromise and not everyone, in fact, probably no one was 100 percent happy with the final product yet they came together. Ben Franklin performed the critical role at the convention and bringing about the spirit of compromise that ultimately allowed them to get over the finish line with George Washington as the presider at the convention.  
      And that compromise is contained in the words of the document. Of course, precedent is part of the system we have now and I would just like to add that that precedent is critical to how we today decide cases. But the original meaning of the words control over any intent of any one person or group of people.  
KENNEDY:  Briefly, do you put much stock in Feran's treatise compilation discussion of the conventional records?  
KAVANAUGH:  So, I find them fascinating, the notes of the convention and to see the day-by-day debate on the convention and how things changed, how close we were to so many different things. Things such as proportional representation in the Senate, that was close; a one-term president, that was close; the various comprises that were reached; the debate over the necessary and proper clause.  
      Some of those things that caused Geary and Randolph and Mason not to sign the final Constitution because they had such profound disagreements with the structure and were concerned in some respect with having a Bill of Rights which was not part of the original Constitution.  
      So, I enjoy the notes. I put you learn from them. But again, those don't necessarily control those help you understand, but they don't control over the actual words of the document. So, too the Federalist papers, they help you understand what's going on and how do we develop together as a whole and they help you understand the government be up to the focus on the words.  
KENNEDY:  Thank you, Judge.  
      Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Since Senator Leahy gave his eight minutes to Senator Hirono, I'm going to give Senator Leahy what time he needs off of my time.  
LEAHY:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      I'll be very brief. Judge, how are you doing?  
KAVANAUGH:  I'm doing great. It's an honor to be here, Senator.  
       
LEAHY:  In concurrence in Klayman v. Obama, you went out of your way to say that not only is the dragnet collection of America's telephone records about the National Security Agency OK because it's not a search. You also said, and I didn't see any support in this, that even if it is a search, it is justified in order to prevent terrorism.  
      I believe Senator Lee is still here. This was months after Senator Lee and I worked to pass the USA Freedom Act, which prohibited such collection. Now, the year before you showed your opinion, The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board stated, "We could not identify a single instance involving a threat to the United States in which the program made a concrete difference in the outcome of counterterrorism investigations."  
      It is also say phone records program was not essential to thwarting terrorist attacks. Why didn't you I'm just curious, why you went out of your way to write an opinion stating that the program met a critical national security need when it already had been found by the National Security people it made no concrete difference in fighting terrorism?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I appreciate that question. The important point I would say is i was trying to articulate what I thought based on the precedent at that time when your information went to a third party and the government obtained the information from the third party, the existing Supreme Court precedent was that your privacy interest was essentially zero.  
      The opinion for the Supreme Court by Chief Justice Roberts this past spring in the Carpenter case is a game-changer and that's important. I talked repeatedly in this hearing about how technology will be one of the huge issues with the Fourth Amendment going forward and you see Chief Justice Roberts' majority opinion in Carpenter.  
      That alters and really is a game-changer from the precedent on which I was writing at that time. So, I would  
LEAHY:  Do you think if the Carpenter had been decided, you would have written a concurrence as you did with the claimant?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think I don't see how I could have.  
LEAHY:  Thank you. I agree with that. You there was zero expectation of privacy in a person's movement outside their home. He said, quote, "The sum of the infinite number is zero. Value parts result to zero."  
      Given the ever-greater data available to all of us, the ever-greater computing power, there's more computing power here than there was in our first moon , this sounds more like an analysis we get from the Chinese government and from James Madison had he known about what we can do.  
      So, because, do you believe that there comes a point in which collection of data by a person becomes so pervasive that a warrant would be required even with the collection of one byte of the same data would not?  
KAVANAUGH:  Two points on that, Senator, I also went on in that opinion to say the attachment of the GPS device on the car was an invasion of the property right and that independently would be a Fourth Amendment problem.  
      When the case went to the Supreme Court, the majority opinion for the Supreme Court followed that approach that I had articulated in saying that it was a violation of the Fourth Amendment to the approach I had articulated there formed the basis of saying it was actually unconstitutional in that case to install the device.  
      I relied in that on the Silverman decision from 1961 and Justice Brennan's concurring opinion in the Knots case in the 1970s. On your other point on technology and the phone that you held up, I do think the Supreme Court case law in the Riley case written by Chief Justice Roberts and the Carpenter case written by Chief Justice Roberts both majority opinions show his and the court's recognition of the issue that you're describing in that technology.  
      It's made things different and we need to understand those differences for purposes of applying Fourth Amendment law now. And I do think those two decisions are quite important as we move forward and I think this will be one someone sitting in this chair 10 years from now, I think the question of technology on Fourth Amendment, First Amendment, war powers is going to be of central importance.  
      So, I appreciate the question but I think the Supreme Court case law is developing in a way consistent with your concern.  
LEAHY:  Do you think it's consistent with the fact that there will be areas so pervasive that you will need warrants?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, that the Supreme Court case law is certainly suggesting as much in the Riley and Carpenter case and the Jones GPS case which I had written as you know.  
LEAHY:  Yes. I mention this and thank you, Mr. Chairman, because Senator Lee and I spent a great deal of time talking through our colleagues both Republicans and Democrats because of our concern that privacy is disappearing and privacy is important.  
      Thank you. Mr. Chairman.  
SASSE:  Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman? Could I make a 30-second comment?  
GRASSLEY:  Yes.  
SASSE:  I'm not aligned with the Leahy-Lee bill on USA Freedom but I just want to say I thought that was a great line of questioning. And so much of the American people's absorption of events like this through cable news is right v. left and I think that was past v. future.  
      And I just think there's a lot there, Senator Leahy, that's really useful for us to think about. Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Whitehouse?  
WHITEHOUSE:  Thank you very much, Judge. Well, we met in my office. I was trying to get a sense of the intimacy of your relationship with Mr. Leo, the Federalist Society. I asked you if he was in your phone, do you remember that?  
KAVANAUGH:  I do.  
WHITEHOUSE:  And you answered as to whether he was in the contacts or saved calls or whatever, just could you let me know for the record what you said then? I don't want to put words in your mouth.  
KAVANAUGH:  I said yes.  
WHITEHOUSE:  With respect to our earlier  
KAVANAUGH:  I've known him for 25 years.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes. With respect to our earlier question about waiving source confidentiality with respect to reporters who you spoke to during our investigation, I just want to make sure they understand what you said. Did you kind of refer it to Judge Starr, and I don't want to be in a situation where I'm getting the two of you going opposite ways. Do I correctly understand that you personally have no objection to reporters disclosing their conversations with you, you just don't want to speak for Judge Starr who you feel has equities here to the extent that you were working at his direction where you have a personal objection to the reporters disclosing those conversations?  
KAVANAUGH:  I do want to think about that some more, Senator.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Could you get back to me on that?  
KAVANAUGH:  I can.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Under advisement, it was one of the options I offered you and you have taken it. Fair enough.  
      You had a lot of conversation with all of us about the concern that you're basically a human torpedo being launched at the Mueller investigation so that when it gets to the Supreme Court, you'll knock it out. And the articles have been talked to a lot about that in the context of the president camp you investigated and your comment about Nixon been wrongly decided has been talked about a lot.  
      And how you have pushed back on that has been to assert that United States v. Nixon is one of the four best decisions in the court's history.  
KAVANAUGH:  I've said that before.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes. So, here's my concern because virtually every time, if not, every time that you have mentioned United States v. Nixon, you've dropped him to your description of the holding that it was a trial court subpoena.  
      I don't know if you dropped that in just as a factual observation because that was in fact a 17(c) trial subpoena or whether that was a loophole and a escape hatch so that when that comes, you're in a position to say, well, I told the Senate of that because that was a trial court subpoena but Mueller is going to be coming with grand jury subpoenas and they're different and so nothing that I said in that hearing should interfere with my ability to stop Mueller's subpoenas.  
      What in that context is your view of the trial court subpoena part of U.S. v. Nixon? Was that essential to the holding or were you just using that to describe one of the facts in the holding?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I appreciate that. I've been careful to describe the holding of the case and  
WHITEHOUSE:  Does it apply to a grand jury?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, that's so, I figured out we'd get lots of hypothetical questions about this, that, or the other thing and as a sitting judge, I need to be careful about  
WHITEHOUSE:  I know but you're the one who's been dropping this trial court phrase in and I think it's fair to ask you, are you simply using that as a factual observation or is that the escape hatch to be able to discard U.S. v. Nixon in this context and say, yes, still a great decision but it has no relevance to the ongoing investigation of the president investigations of the president.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right. I understand the question  
WHITEHOUSE:  OK.  
KAVANAUGH:   and appreciate the question, but I what I've done is described the holding as I've described it in this hearing because I think it's important not to be answering hypotheticals  
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes. But you're the one who chose to use it as a counterpoint or as evidence against concerns that you were going to basically, like I said, be the human torpedo to take out anything that Mueller brings to the White to the Supreme Court.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, what I was trying to do was merely reiterate what I've said in a variety of forums over 20 years as against one 1999 excerpt that I thought was a serious and severe misunderstanding of my longstanding position about the case.  
WHITEHOUSE:  But since you have been the one who put your regard for United States for Nixon into play as a data point in the conversation about whether you're going to take the Mueller investigation at your first chance, I think it's fair for us because you've opened the door by using it that way that you're asked whether you believe that the central holding of Nixon, which is that a president has to answer a subpoena, applies equally to a trial court and a grand jury subpoena alike. Because if it doesn't, I'm going feel very misled by the way you've used this.  
KAVANAUGH:  Right. So, I have tried to describe in summary fashion exactly what the Supreme Court said in the Nixon case and it's a very important opinion and it's very but I've tried to describe just what they said and not go beyond what they said in themselves in that opinion.  
WHITEHOUSE:  And so, why did you use it in the context of a grand jury investigation if you didn't mean it that way?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I was you mean, when I was an independent counsel office?  
WHITEHOUSE:  No. No. No. When we were in this conversation right here. We have a lot of questions where we've been talking about is the president amenable to investigation, is the president amenable to indictment, is the president amenable to subpoena, and you constantly referred back to U.S. v. Nixon and if that's not a real assurance because in the back of your mind, which you didn't tell us, is that that's only limited to trial subpoenas and I'm still cool with taking out grand jury subpoenas, I think that would be a very unfortunate way to have dealt with the Senate on that question.  
KAVANAUGH:  I understand your point on that, Senator. What I've tried to do is describe the holding of the case what I've said before about it and I've been getting a lot of questions, real a lot of questions about a 1999 excerpt that I think was a severe distortion of what I've said for many years.  
WHITEHOUSE:  Yes. This is very different. This is whether you, in this hearing, have been essentially playing a trick on the Committee by using United States v. Nixon in this way without telling us that while you're using it in this way, all you intend is that its application is to a trial subpoena and that the subpoena from the Mueller investigation or from anybody else to the president you can knock those out to your heart's content.  
KAVANAUGH:  I appreciate the question but if you the opinion, all I'm doing is describing what the opinion said  
WHITEHOUSE:  They're all has been worried and I'll let it go at this point because I'm obviously not going to get an answer. But I assert that you did more than that by putting this decision in play as a statement or as a signal to us that we should take a little bit of have a little bit of a pause if you will about the U.S. v. Nixon should be looked at again and the president can't be investigated points that we addressed.  
KAVANAUGH:  But, Senator, I think other people have been putting it in play repeatedly based on one excerpt that was a distortion not  
WHITEHOUSE:  OK. Never mind. One last question.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
WHITEHOUSE:  In the Bloomin decision, your decision, it would be legal for Vladimir Putin to come to the United States and buy issue ads.  
KAVANAUGH:  Can you repeat that?  
WHITEHOUSE:  Under your reading of the Bloomin decision which says that foreign officials can buy issue ads under election law, Vladimir Putin would be able to buy issue ads in American elections. Does the recent activity of Russia hacking our last election, interfering with our last election and helping to elect Donald Trump give you any pause about the wisdom of a judicial construction that would allow foreign nationals to buy issue ads in American elections?  
KAVANAUGH:  Three quick points, Senator. First, my decision for a unanimous panel in that case which in turn was unanimously affirmed by the Supreme Court  
WHITEHOUSE:  Not unanimous on that point though I don't believe but go ahead.  
KAVANAUGH:  It was unanimously affirmed some narrowly by the Supreme Court. The upheld limits on contributions by foreign nationals, summarizing briefly there, Justice Stevens in the dissent of Citizens United has subsequently repeatedly and explicitly praised my decision in Bloomin in various speeches he has given.  
      Third point is that the case did not involve expenditures and Congress, of course, is free to put in laws that ban expenditures by foreign citizens and those  
WHITEHOUSE:  Just specific issue ads.  
KAVANAUGH:  I was talking about what the statute said. Congress is free, subject to, of course, challenge to  
WHITEHOUSE:  My time is up.  
KAVANAUGH:   to put some kind of law in place.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Cornyn.  
CORNYN:  So, just to reiterate, Congress writes campaign finance law, not the federal courts, correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is correct, Senator.  
CORNYN:  You are asked whether you were a human torpedo. Do you even know what that means?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't but I understood the gist of the question about this.  
CORNYN:  Well, with all due respect to my friend Senator Whitehouse, he's got a very fertile imagination. It strikes me. And what does it prove that you have somebody's name in your phone's directory, somebody you've known for 25 years?  
KAVANAUGH:  For 25 years.  
CORNYN:  What does that prove?  
KAVANAUGH:  It proves I've known someone for 25 it might be more than 25 years but in any event, it's a long time.  
CORNYN:  That sounds about right.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
CORNYN:  That's nothing more strikes me. That great legal sage, unfortunately, he's not here so I  
      
      
CORNYN:  That's a great legal sage.  
       
      And I'm not talking about Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. Senator Kennedy said something that really struck me as right on. He said the Bill of Rights is not an a la carte menu and I'd like to know whether you agree with that. Can you pick and choose which of the Bill of Rights is more important than another or whether you can ignore some and recognize others? How do you as a federal judge address that?  
KAVANAUGH:  As a sitting judge, I try to apply all the provisions of the Constitution and all the precedents of the Supreme Court without picking or choosing which precedents or which pieces of precedents that I might favor or which pieces of the Constitution or the laws passed by Congress apply to them all.  
CORNYN:  So, is any one of the Bill of Rights more important than another?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I think they're all important. All the provisions of the Constitution and the structural provisions, of course, are essential or the Bill of Rights wouldn't can't be nearly as meaningful because we wouldn't have the structural protections to ensure an independent judiciary to protect them.  
CORNYN:  Our friend Senator Durbin asked you to apply common sense when interpreting the Second Amendment. I'm tempted to say common sense isn't all that common. But is that a basis upon which to construe the provisions of the Second Amendment just to apply your common sense?  
KAVANAUGH:  No. The rules you apply the precedent of the Supreme Court interpreting the Second Amendment which in turn interpreted the words, history, structure, historical practice of the Second Amendment. And as a lower court judge, it was incumbent upon me to apply that precedent as faithfully as I could and I explained in very painstaking detail.  
      And I really encourage anyone who is interested and has some time because it's long to read that dissent. I'm the analysis in there is carefully laid out and then at the end, I describe that I understand the real world consequences of this and the real world issues and where I've grown up and what I've experienced. But I explained it in great detail.  
CORNYN:  Thank you.  
      Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Coons, you have about nine and a half minutes.  
COONS:  Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
      I ask unanimous consent that letters from eight different groups, organizations, individuals be entered into the record.  
GRASSLEY:  Without objection, it's ordered.  
COONS:  Thank you.  
      Judge Kavanaugh, we're at the end of a long day and I'd like to take a few minutes and just explore with you a speech you gave last year, a speech at the American Enterprise Institute entitled, "The Constitutional Statesmanship of Chief Justice Rehnquist."  
      There you called Rehnquist your first judicial hero and you went on to discuss at length the '97 case Washington v. Glucksberg in which the Supreme Court rejected a fundamental right to physician-assisted suicide.  
      And Glucksberg, as you know, Rehnquist explained his belief that the only liberties protected by the due process clause are those that are, quote, "deeply rooted in the nation's history, legal tradition, and practices."  
      You praised Rehnquist's opinion. You said, and I'm quoting your speech here now, "The Glucksberg case stands to this day as an important precedent limiting the court's role in the realm of social power and helping ensure the court operates more as a court of law and less as an institution of social policy" end quote.  
      You further praised Rehnquist as a justice who, I think I'm quoting here, "was successful in standing the general tide of freewheeling judicial creation of enumerated rights that were not rooted in the nation's history and traditions."  
      The only conclusion I can draw from your praise in this speech last year, Rehnquist subsequent due process through his prudence in his Glucksberg opinion is that you endorse this so called Glucksberg test which asserts the only substantive due process rights protected by the due process clause, excuse me, are those objectively rooted in the American legal history tradition.  
      You even said yesterday in a similar exchange here that all roads lead to the Glucksberg test. So, let me in a few minutes I have left ask you a few quick questions about the implications of applying the Glucksberg test  
KAVANAUGH:  Can i say one thing first?  
COONS:  I want to get a couple of questions quick and then depending on the grace of the Chairman, we may have an exchange  
KAVANAUGH:  Still the same thing Justice Kagan said when she was in this chair about Glucksberg.  
COONS:  And here's the most important thing about Justice Kagan's jurisprudence, she did not apply the Glucksberg test in U.S. v. Windsor, in Obergefell or Whole Woman's Health.  
      So, the question I want to get to is what would it mean to go and apply this test in a range of setting? So, first, is judicial protection of the fundamental right to access and use contraception consistent with the Glucksberg test? Just simply yes or no question, Judge.  
KAVANAUGH:  I disagree that it's a simple yes or no question. What I've said here is that the precedent of the Supreme Court on that question, what Justice Alito and Chief Justice Roberts said about those, Justice White's concurrence in Griswold as first way of application of precedent.  
      What is important to know about Glucksberg is it cited planned parenthood v. Casey's authority  
COONS:  Yes.  
KAVANAUGH:   as authority  
COONS:  But on the specific issue of and I appreciate you having said, those were correctly decided. I'm just trying to get clarity about if it were the Glucksberg test well rooted in our history, legal tradition and practices, would the court have ever reached those results on a fundamental right to access and use contraception given the long history of states having statutes that prohibited access to contraception?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, Justice White explained in his concurrence in Griswold, actually, those laws had not been enforced for decades. But put that aside, the test in Glucksberg as Justice Kagan explained when she was sitting in this chair is a test that is guiding the Supreme Court going forward and has been cited in the precedent. It did not disturb any pre-existing precedent. Indeed, cited Casey as authority.  
COONS:  It did. So, let's move on then to abortion which was really centrally an issue in Casey. Is judicial protection of abortion rights consistent with the Glucksberg test something deeply rooted in our history, legal, tradition and practices?  
KAVANAUGH:  Again, I think it's important to underscore that that Glucksberg decision written by Chief Justice Rehnquist cited planned parenthood v. Casey's authority, which in turn reaffirmed Casey reaffirmed Roe v. Wade  
COONS:  Had it been the test at the time the court would not have reached that result? In fact, you said at the AEI lecture, even a first year law student could tell you the Glucksberg court's approach to unenumerated rights was not consistent with the approach of the cases Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey.  
      So, we know the Glucksberg test have it then applied wouldn't reached that same result. Let's move if we could from contraception, abortion to intimacy. Is the Glucksberg test consistent with court's historic decision, Justice Kennedy's decision in 2003, Lawrence V. Texas which the court held the Constitution protects intimacy, including same sex intimacy between consenting adults?  
KAVANAUGH:  What the Supreme Court said last year in a broad majority under the precedents that now exist, the days of treating gay and lesbian Americans as second-class citizens, gay and lesbian couples are dignity and worth are over and that was Justice Kennedy joined by Chief Justice Roberts, Justice Alito, Justice, Justice Breyer, and Justice Kagan. Statement for the Supreme Court summarizing an essence, Romer, Lawrence, Windsor, and Obergefell.  
COONS:  But had the Glucksberg test then the sole test being applied during Lawrence, Justice Kennedy would not have reached the result he did.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well  
COONS:  Let's move to the right to marry, if we could for moment  
KAVANAUGH:  One sentence  
COONS:  The last piece we're going to get through?  
KAVANAUGH:  Windsor  
COONS:  The right to marry is clearly rooted in our history legal tradition and practices. Yes, Judge? We both know the landmark case, Loving v. Virginia distinguishes marriage is clearly deeply rooted in our history and legal tradition and practices. But interracial marriage was not.  
      In fact, it was barred in many states probably longest in Virginia and the Supreme Court struck an important blow in 1967 in striking down anti-miscegenation statutes.  
      Last, what about same-sex marriage? If the Glucksberg test were the test applied, is a right to marriage regardless of gender deeply rooted in our history, legal tradition, and practices?  
KAVANAUGH:  A couple things, Senator. I think Windsor and Obergefell talk about equality as well, so there's an equality principle. And as the court said, in Masterpiece Cakeshop, summarizing all those decisions, a line of five decisions all written by Justice Kennedy, Romer, Lawrence, Windsor, Obergefell on Masterpiece Cakeshop.  
COONS:  Were they all correctly decided?  
KAVANAUGH:  They're all none of the eight currently sitting justices have answered questions about any of those cases. As Justice Kagan said, no thumbs up or thumbs down on those recent cases. But they what the court said in Masterpiece Cakeshop is the state the most recent statement of the Supreme Court for a broad cross section, a broad a large number of justices on the Supreme Court and I think I'll leave it by referring you to that statement from the Supreme Court.  
COONS:  Here's my core concern. This quote this quote, what you chose to do in a speech last year in front of AEI was to lift up this Glucksberg test, what you chose to say yesterday all roads lead to the Glucksberg test gives me pause and concern. If you feel I've somehow misquoted you in the "American Spectator" article, if you feel I've somehow misquoted you here, I expect we'll have a chance through some written exchanges to give you an opportunity to further clarify that given the limitation on my time.   
COONS:  But in what I've read about how the Glucksberg test has or hasn't been applied, the ways most critically in which Justice Kennedy himself rejected the Glucksberg test in his opinions and Casey, Lawrence, in Obergefell, I think the Glucksberg test is better at rejecting claims of constitutional rights than it is at accepting them and I think it's a blunt instrument and I'm concerned that it may reveal an enthusiasm for a test that would permit the continued exercise of government power in ways that, frankly, would blow up all modern substantive due process if applied rigidly, it would blow up precedent in contraception, abortion, protection from sterilization, marriage, a whole range of areas. These are settled precedent.  
      But those of us who sit trying to decide whether you should be the next justice and take Justice Kennedy's seat have to ask ourselves what your views would be. And in this recent speech were you cite your first judicial hero, Rehnquist, in articulating the Glucksberg test, I worry that you reveal you don't share the view of our framers in particular, the 14th Amendment framers who understood constitutional rights to exist in significant part to write historical wrongs, not to ignore them or entrench them.  
      Our Constitution's protection for people who are vulnerable or marginalized or just different from the majority is what makes us a beacon to the rest of the world where there are so many countries, where minorities or those who dare to live their lives differently, are marginalized or oppressed. And it is exactly this Glucksberg test that worries me most because it excludes all such people from the circle of constitutional concern and protection.  
      I'm troubled, Judge Kavanaugh. If you don't understand that as the driving animating force of our constitutional culture and this is a test that in my view is just not up to the task of vindicating our country's greatest ideals. Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  If you feel you want to comment, go ahead, and then I'll call on Senator Lee.  
KAVANAUGH:  Two points. Justice Kennedy joined Glucksberg, Justice Kagan cited Glucksberg repeatedly when she was in this chair.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Lee?  
LEE:  So, Glucksberg is precedent, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  It is.  
LEE:  And a precedent that Justice Kennedy joined and so it's in the law. I mean, it's established. It is entitled to the same respect as other precedent including other precedent mentioned by Senator Coons?  
KAVANAUGH:  It is an important precedent in the Supreme Court as been discussed by other justices' overtime.  
LEE:  And nothing in Glucksberg or in those other cases suggest that Glucksberg is incompatible? It suggests that it cannot suggest that it's somehow incompatible with those other precedents?  
KAVANAUGH:  It's cited Casey as authority.  
LEE:  Thank you.  
      Mr. Chairman, I have a letter that I'd like to offer into the record. This is signed by David Levi, he's one of our nation's foremost legal scholars.  
GRASSLEY:  Without objection, so ordered.  
LEE:  He served until about a month ago as the Dean of Duke Law School. Prior to that, he served as the U.S. district judge in the Eastern District of California.  
      He shared some great personal information in here about his interaction with Judge Kavanaugh and about the fact that Judge Kavanaugh came to Duke Law School and as it's becoming a theme in this hearing, it describes how Judge Kavanaugh was a mentor to these students who participated in Moot Court competitions.  
      Answered their questions, gave advice to the participants and all the other students there. And I offer that into the record. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
GRASSLEY:  A second one?  
LEE:  Just this one. You've already admitted it. I'm just thanking you now for doing that.  
      Your phone, the contents of your phone, the question you received from Senator Whitehouse, the contents of your phone in light of, he can't really ask you that, right?  
      I want to echo something that Senator Crapo mentioned a few minutes ago with regard to Western Lands. I'm not going to make you answer any questions regarding this but there are significant issues that frequently don't get addressed as a result of the fact that there are just a few states where the federal government owns most of the land.  
      In every state east of the Mississippi, the federal government owns less than 15 percent of the land. In many of the states, it's in the low single digits.  
      In every state west of Colorado, federal government owns more than 15 percent of the land. In many states like my own, it's most of the land. The federal government owns two-thirds of the land in the State of Utah, even more in Nevada.  
      As a result of this, our local communities are severely impaired in terms of their ability to manage their own affairs, to authorize the most basic of economic activities going on with their land. Our local communities can't tax the land and property taxes are where, in most states including my own, a lot of the money comes from to fund schools, to fund basic services like search and rescue, police fire suppression, and so forth.  
      As a result of the federal government owns all that land and controls what activity can occur on it, these states are locked out. They are thwarted in development. You can't do anything on that land without a mother-may-I. And in states like mine, you almost can't even access a lot of property without crossing federal land and you have to get a permit for it.  
      In many respects, this puts the states on an equal footing, one as compared to another. And in many respects, I think this runs into conflict at least potentially with some language put in to the Enclave Clause in the section in Clause 17 of Article I Section 8 that talks about how if the federal government is going to be the sole sovereign lawmaking authority on federal land within a state, it's supposed to be acquired by and with the consent of the host states legislature.  
      That was that language was put into the Enclave Cause as a result of a concern expressed by Elbridge Gerry who expressed in early September of 1787 as the convention was drawing to a close, that unless this cause was put in there, the federal government might acquire a whole lot of land in a lot of these states and use its exclusive lawmaking power under the enclave laws under the enclave cause to compel the states to a humble undue obedience to the general government.  
      And yet, this has been overlooked for a long time since the late 1970s. Many have improperly conflated the Enclave Cause authority that is the federal government's sole sovereign lawmaking capacity relative to federal lands with its property clause authority under Article IV Section 3 Clause 2 which is really a proprietary interest authorizing Congress to sell and otherwise dispose of territory and other property owned by the federal government.  
      There are two different things in order to exercise the article for power, Congress just acts because it can dispose of land in order to exercise the Article I Section A Clause 17 power, to be the exclusive sole sovereign lawmaking authority within a state as to that federal land, that land has to have been acquired by and with the consent of the host states' legislature.  
      The court has not been careful to distinguish between those two in part because of some, what I believe was overgeneralization in the case called Kleppe v. New Mexico. This is of concern to my state and I felt the need to make that point to you today. You don't have to respond to it.  
      I do, however, have a very important question for you. Why do you I notice that you take a lot of notes and I respect that because I can tell you're paying close attention, but you use a Sharpie. And it's not a fine-tipped Sharpie. It's a regular Sharpie that might smudge and make why do you prefer that pen? I'm just dying of curiosity?  
KAVANAUGH:  So, I can see it. It's nothing scientific.  
LEE:  That is a perfect mic drop moment and with that, Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time. Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Klobuchar.  
KLOBUCHAR:  OK. That's going to be really hard to follow but I will try my best.  
      So, Judge, we talked a lot about some big issues,, Sullivan, executive power, and I want to get back to where I started that you've talked over the last few days about what matters is real things, real people, and I want to bring it back to that and some of the issues that are dense in terms of legal issues, but in the end, mean things to people.  
      And one of the things we've talked about is that net neutrality rules. And we know that those were the protections that were put in place by the FCC a few years back to prevent Internet service providers from blocking and slowing traffic so that people would have equal access to the Internet.  
      And the case came before the D.C. Circuit and they were against you, the rules were upheld by a panel of judges appointed by presence of both parties. We talked about this yesterday. I don't want to get over your theory again on major rules which I disagreed with.  
      But there was something we didn't talk about yesterday and that was that you went actually beyond the bounds of what the parties had argued to reach a constitutional issue in that case. You found that the First Amendment protects Internet service providers' right to exercise editorial discretion even though neither of the principal parties had raised a First Amendment argument at all. Why did you go out of your way to address that constitutional issue?  
KAVANAUGH:  That issue was raised in some of the briefs in the case point one. Point two, I followed the Turner Broadcasting approach that was a majority of the opinion of the Supreme Court in 1994 of Justice Kennedy in the cable operator context which as I explained in the opinion seemed to apply very closely in this situation.  
      It's something I've written prior opinions on as well about how Justice Kennedy's opinion in Turner Broadcasting applies in other context and it seemed  
KLOBUCHAR:  But were you the only judge that went that far to take on the constitutional issues?  
KAVANAUGH:  I may have been, but I was applying Turner Broadcasting. It's a precedent of the Supreme Court that seemed on point and it was raised in the case by a party and I thought it's important to explain  
KLOBUCHAR:  But you've said that the canon of constitutional avoidance which says court should avoid reaching constitutional questions that aren't necessary to decide a case is something you would quote, "considered jettisoning all together." I think you said that in a 2016 book review, is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I would talk about I talked about the problem of ambiguity as a trigger for certain canons of statutory interpretation because, at least in my practice over the last 12 years, that's been one of the sources of disagreement among judges that's hard to grapple with and figure out what's the how to bridge that divide when one judge says I think this is ambiguous and another one says, no it's not.  
      And then Justice Scalia and Kagan have both talked about that as being an issue and that's one of the reasons I talked about it in that Harvard Law Review article. That was a law review article, however, and not a case or a decision of mine were I was just identifying my experience and talking about ideas.  
      One thing about First Amendment issues I want to make clear, I pointed out there, if a company has market power under Turner Broadcasting, then the government does have the authority to regulate it. But if a company doesn't have market power, Turner Broadcasting says no, but it doesn't bar all regulation by any stretch, not even close.  
KLOBUCHAR:  It just would seem that there's First Amendment rights of individuals to use the Internet and express their own views and if it gets too expensive for them to use it, you basically said that the companies have these First Amendment rights, not looking at the issue that I think a lot of us as policymakers see is that unless you have some rules of the road in place, it's going to make it very hard for individuals and small businesses to access.  
KAVANAUGH:  I think that's a fair point. An argument like that was raised in the Turner Broadcasting case in 1994 when it was argued to the Supreme Court, that's was and that's not the argument that the Supreme Court accepted at that time.  
KLOBUCHAR:  OK. Could I you mentioned Justice Scalia and I wanted to end with when we talk about the effects of things and he actually was the champion of the Chevron case which, of course, was the Supreme Court ruling that allowed agency decisions on health and safety protections to stay in the book. It's been referenced in more than 15,000 decisions.  
      But you said it was a precedent, to me yesterday, but your writings in your writing, you've called it an atextual invention of courts and a judicially orchestrated shift of power. You have said that instead of applying Chevron, court should simply determine the best reading of the statute and no longer defer to agency interpretations.  
      Doesn't this mean you really would prefer de novo review for those that are still watching this at home? That would mean that the courts would act if they are as if they're considering questions of law for the first time, so that they wouldn't defer to the agency.  
      And you have and the way we've set this up here is Congress passes laws, the agencies often do the fine work with experts of figuring out what those rules are. So, this is what I'm so concerned about for people who's drinking water for safety reasons, if you would then go and go to de novo review or change this, and I think it's a very big deal when you look at 15,000 decisions and the fact that Justice Scalia supported this and you appear to be itching toward the other side.  
KAVANAUGH:  What I've done is identify some of the issues that arise when you're apply the doctrine but I also pointed out in that same article that it is it has overlap with not to get too in the weeds here, but with the State Farm doctrine.  
      And so, when there's statutory terms such as reasonable, feasible, those kind appropriate, those kinds of statutory terms that judicial deference is appropriate  
KLOBUCHAR:  Do you think a judge that doesn't have a technology background is better deciding this and say experts of the FCC when you have rules or someone with no scientific background better to decide some of these things than people who are scientists?  
KAVANAUGH:  So, I have a number of cases were that statute gives discretion of the agency to exercise this kind of expert scientific judgments were I've said courts should not second-guess those in the clean air context where I've upheld emissions limits, the NAAQS. I've written opinion, the air quality standards. I've written opinion saying court should not second guess what EPA where EPA sets the limit within the NAAQS.  
      So, too in a case called American Radio Relay League. I made clear that court shouldn't unduly second guess agencies.  
      It's all about the statute that you write. If it has discretion built into, I am one who doesn't think courts should add requirements that you haven't put in. If you've written a really tightly confined statute, at the same time, if an agency pushes beyond those boundaries, the courts are there to draw the line and that's how I've tried to be evenhanded and how I've applied this  
KLOBUCHAR:  But again and we've went over this yesterday, but just the finding of unconstitutionality with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and then this the Internet rules were, again, you're the only one saying this and now you would be on the highest court of the land if you're to be confirmed.  
      And just for me, these rules, it's not just some law on the books, it's personal. We're proud of our clean water and clean lakes and rivers in Minnesota, that's safety rules.  
      My grandpa worked 1,500 feet underground in the mines his whole life. He went down there in a cage and the sirens would sound and people would run because they didn't know who was killed in the mine that day.  
      And my dad still remembers those coffins in the catholic church up in Ely, Minnesota, and it was so safety rules that came in place. Many of them implemented by agencies that got us to where we are. And it really concerns me if we overturn all of that and just leave it in the hands of Congress to have to meet through all these minute details when we can even get through 42,000 documents.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Blumenthal?  
KAVANAUGH:  Can I just say two quick points?  
GRASSLEY:  Sure. I didn't know there was a question.  
KAVANAUGH:  One, I have a large number of cases particularly in the EPA context where I've upheld EPA rules that have done things and another administrative agency context. It's all about and I understand what you're saying about the people affected by the rules and in each of the cases I've written, I've tried to make that clear.  
      Ultimately, my approach to statutory interpretation is rooted in respect for Congress.  
GRASSLEY:  Senator Blumenthal?  
BLUMENTHAL:  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  
      Good evening. Judge Kavanaugh, I'd like you to tell me that I am wrong and I'd like you to tell me that you would put aside your Heller to dissent, and as a member of the United States Supreme Court, if confirmed, you would uphold a ban on assault weapons.  
KAVANAUGH:  Sir, as a sitting judge I can't make a commitment about a future case.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Well, let me put it this way. In your view, a ban on assault weapons, in your dissent, you voted to strike down because it was not longstanding and it apply to weapons in common use. Is that correct?  
KAVANAUGH:  I applied the precedent of the Supreme Court which made clear that machine guns can be banned, machine guns can be banned. The Supreme Court said that that explicitly and I said it as well. And it's  
BLUMENTHAL:  But assault weapons are equally destructive and the evidence for them is equally compelling, that is the evidence for a ban on assault weapons which is what the majority in Heller II, in your court found, did it not?  
      In fact, the court said that it was upholding the ban on assault weapons because, quote, "Our role is narrower to determine whether the district has presented evidence sufficient to establish the reasonable fit we require between the issue and an important or substantial governmental interest. Governmental interest, public safety, never figured in to your test on Heller II, did it?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I the precedent of the Supreme Court which I replied since the government can ban machine guns, I encourage I explained in detail how I interpreted Heller and the Staples case from 1994 which I cited, referred to these kinds of guns as in common use. So, I would encourage you to at least, if you're thinking of me, I have to apply precedent, take a look at that Staples case and  
BLUMENTHAL:  I have taken a look at the Staples case, but more compellingly, I've taken a look at what assault weapons can do.  
KAVANAUGH:  I understand that but I also  
BLUMENTHAL:  And I thought about bringing some posters here today showing what happened at Sandy Hook when 20 beautiful children and six wonderful educators were gunned down just as has happened in countless places across the country including Sutherland Springs in Texas, Parkland in Florida, Las Vegas in Nevada, Orlando and Florida, Virginia Tech, San Bernardino, most recent in Florida, of course.  
      Assault weapons were designed to kill people, were they not?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the end of Heller II opinion, I understand and, of course, detest all school violence or gun violence and I said that at the end of Heller II  
       
BLUMENTHAL:   violence.  
KAVANAUGH:  What I  
BLUMENTHAL:  I'm asking you to look at the real world.  
KAVANAUGH:  And I did that.  
BLUMENTHAL:  With real impacts and I'm asking you to reconsider your dissent in Heller II and look at the impacts on children, young children, who have their whole life ahead of them as did those 20 6th graders in Sandy Hook and a ban on assault weapons might, well, have saved them. There's no knowing, for sure. But they be alive today if there had been a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines and better background check.  
      And now, we face the specter of a new kind of weapon, 3D blueprint design guns that are untraceable and undetectable, by and large. They are not in common use yet but they will be if they are not banned.  
      There is no traditional ban on them. They were unimaginable in 1789. The test that you're imposing here is out of touch with the real world and the impact on real lives.  
      And I would just that, with all due respect, you give us the benefit of saying here that you will reconsider a test that is out of touch with reality.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I appreciate what you're saying. If someone came to me and argued that the test was wrong, I will, of course of course, I always would listen and try to understand.  
      What I did there at the end of my opinion, I'm from this area  
BLUMENTHAL:  And I know you've lived in the gun  
       
BLUMENTHAL:   capital of the world. I've heard you say it a number of times and I  
KAVANAUGH:  But I grew up  
       
KAVANAUGH:  I mean, I would I don't want to overstate that but I I'm in the I grew up in an urban/suburban environment where it was there was a lot of gang and gun violence in the 1980s in the D.C. in the District of Columbia and I talked about Police Chief Cathy Lanier's goals at the on Police Chief Cathy  
BLUMENTHAL:  But all of that experience isn't reflected in the test that you're imposing here despite your claim that you look to the real world and impacts on real people nor is it reflected in the test on presidential power that you're going to impose which says in effect, a precedent can strike down the Affordable Care Act, Donald Trump can strike it down if he deems it and he alone, unilaterally, believes it to be unconstitutional even after your court, the D.C. Circuit, even after the United States Supreme Court, even after President Obama and president and the Congress of the United States, all deem it constitutional, that gives the president virtually unchecked power.  
      And in this real world, that's a dangerous prospect for us. Is it not?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, two things. One, on the Second Amendment issue, I did explain as best I could why I felt the precedent controlled and set forth that that test. I did point out that the test that I understood the court to be setting forth would allow potentially more gun regulation depending on how it was applied and say scrutiny would depend, but I pointed that out.  
      And I pointed out what the Supreme Court said about banning machine guns on the presidential power I've referred to you before on prosecutorial discretion, what the limits are of that being tested in court and I've said that in my Marquette speech in 2015. The concept, of course, is as you know, well established in Supreme Court precedent of prosecutorial discretion in the Heckler v. Chaney case.  
BLUMENTHAL:  Judge Kavanaugh, I was at Sandy Hook the afternoon of that massacre. I don't know whether you have been at these kinds of scenes.  
      I don't know whether you've seen the pictures of what assault weapons can do. They were designed for the sole purpose to kill and maim human beings. They're very good at it.  
      They're one of the most effective and efficient weapons known to man. And I would urge you to reconsider.  
      I think the test that you're imposing is out of touch with the reality of what assault weapons do and I think it reflects a broader shortcoming in the way you are applying law to facts and trying to meet an ideological standard rather than a test for the real world.  
GRASSLEY:  Judge, if you care to respond, you could respond  
KAVANAUGH:  I just wanted to thank Senator Blumenthal for sharing that perspective and I, thank you for sharing it, appreciate it and will take it into account and consider it and remember what you've said here. Thank you.  
GRASSLEY:  Your Honor, would you care to take a five-minute break?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, please.  
GRASSLEY:  OK. Recess for five minutes.  
       
LEAHY:  I understood, Senator Blumenthal might have unanimous consent request with regards to some documents if he has that when he comes back in, we will recognize him. Senator Hirono, I believe you're next.  
SASSE:  I think I am  
LEAHY:  Senators, I am sorry  
SASSE:  Go ahead. That's fine.  
LEAHY:  Senator Hirono and then Senator Sasse. Thank you.  
HIRONO:  Oh, I'm sorry  
LEAHY:  I beg your pardon, Senator Hirono, you are recognized.  
HIRONO:  Thank you very much. Senator Leahy and any time that I do not use of my 16 minutes, I would like to have the time go to the Senator Booker. Judge Kavanaugh , as you know, this June, the court delivered a blow to millions of public sector workers with its decision in Janus v. AFSCME and a five to four decision, five of the justices overturned decades old precedent, a case called Abood that workers around the country depended on for fair salaries and basic rights.  
      The Janus decision is important here because it shows how your nomination fits in a larger campaign that groups like the Federalist Society and the Heritage Foundation have been waging for decades decades. The goal is to undermine well-established Supreme Court precedent that protects workers, women and every day Americans. In Janus, five justices overturned Abood, quote, "Because they wanted to," end quote. Those were Justice Kagan's words, not mine.  
      Although the five justices went through the factors for overturning precedent, it identified another what they referred to as very strong reason for not following precedent and that reason was quote, "fundamental free speech rights are at stake."  
      In fact, the five justices said the rule for following precedent also known as stare decisis applies with perhaps least force least force of all the decisions that wrongly deny First Amendment rights. So it sounds as though the court is saying the First Amendment right takes precedent. So why is this important is because of the larger political campaign by groups like the Federalist Society and the Heritage Foundation that I mentioned earlier.  
      So with the help of these groups, the Supreme Court, as Justice Kagan put it, has been, quote, "weaponizing the First Amendment in a way that unleashes judges now and in the future to intervene in economic and regulatory policy," end quote. And in fact, just this past year, the First Amendment was used to advanced the political agenda against workers and women's health and reproductive rights.  
      Judge Kavanaugh, do you agree with the five justices in Janus?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, that is a precedent of the court that of course, because it is one of the recent cases, I can't comment on whether I agree or disagree with it, but it is a precedent that is now part of the body of the Supreme Court case, so  
HIRONO:  And of course, should you get on the Supreme Court, you can either follow that precedent or turn it, but basically the court in Janus said that it came up with a very strong reason for overturning even decades old precedent, the First Amendment rights are at stake. So based on the answer you just gave me, then that kind of rationale would also be the precedent of the court now.  
      So, the Supreme Court says precedent of course and all it takes is five votes to overturn precedent, it has happened in Janus, five votes, and I'm particularly troubled that the five justices in Janus claimed it did not matter that public sector unions have relied on the Abood case for decades and yesterday, when you talked about the role of the precedent, you talked about you used words such as how people rely on the precedent, whether it creates stability. There is predictability, but the five justices in Janus, the fact that the public sector unions have been relying on the Abood decision for 41 years, it did not matter.  
      So, the five justices also claimed that they could overturn Abood as well as well-established precedent because public sector unions were on notice this is quoting the court notice for years regarding this courts misgivings about the Abood case. But as Justice Kagan explained, the so called notice was actually Justice Alito's six year campaign to reverse Abood.  
      So, I won't go over his six year campaign but suffice to say that Justice Alito made it very plain to potential litigants out there who wanted to undo the Abood decision, basically he said, "Come on over because I want to be in a position to be able to reverse Abood." And the only reason in the earlier case called Fredericks said that, Abood was not overturned was because of the death of Justice Alito, and then after that, Justice Gorsuch was confirmed and Justice Gorsuch was going to provide the fifth vote whereas in the previous vote, because of the death of Justice Scalia.  
      There, the case of Fredericks and then in a four to four tie, but then along comes Justice Gorsuch and the fifth vote was there and Abood is overturned and Janus is now the precedent case. So to the extent that the court in Janus said, "Well, you know, by the way, all you litigants all you people out there who were relying on this precedent, you had noticed that we were thinking of overturning this case." So do you believe that a justice should be able to make it easier to overturn even well-established Supreme Court precedent by simply giving notice that he or she has concerns about that precedent because that is exactly what Justice Alito did.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I think the factors that the court considers is whether the prior decision was grievously wrong, whether it is deeply inconsistent with subsequent precedent that's developed around it, the real-world consequences, the workability of the decision as well as reliance in  
HIRONO:  Well, on the other hand, Judge Kavanaugh, how can you call a five to four decision is reflective of the prior decision having been grievously wrong, not to mention that in the case that came before Janus ended in a four to four tie because of the death of Justice Scalia. So by one vote, so the court looked to the notice provided by a justice as one of the justifications for overturning this 41-year-old precedent.  
      So my next question is, do you think that prior writings of someone before becoming a Supreme Court Justice can count as notice that Americans cannot rely on the protections entrenched in well-established precedent. If for example, someone like you did some writing that questioned a precedent, would that suffice as notice for the Supreme Court to overturn precedent ?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I think the factors that the Supreme Court considers in applying it stare decisis are established. You look at the prior decision, whether it is grievously wrong, deeply inconsistent with subsequent precedent, the real-world consequences and the reliance interest, and I understand that you disagree with how those factors were applied and Justice Kagan, of course, in dissent disagreed with how they were applied, and I understand  
HIRONO:  It was a very strong decision. It was a split decision and suddenly you were talking about strong reasons being the First Amendment rights, which Justice Kagan said is now being weaponized and you can see the trend of the five to four decisions that weaponizes First Amendment, we're already seeing that. The court says that to where the First Amendments rights are concerned, that stare decisis, meaning precedent applies for the least force.  
      Going on, so basically, the concern I have about the reasoning in the Janus court is that we will see many more five to four decisions where a precedent can be overturned if a Justice has given notice, as Justice Alito did or if First Amendment rights are concerned.  
      Let me turn to the issue of guns. You were asked some questions about this, about your position on basically Heller, too. The Brennan Center for Justice reported that as of August 20th, 2018, outside groups have spent almost $3.5 million to campaign for your confirmation, and I think we've all seen those ads, by contrast, groups opposing your nomination have spent less than a quarter of that amount. One of those groups spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to get you confirmed to the Supreme Court is the National Rifle Association.  
      The NRA makes clear in their commercials, what is at stake with your nomination, in fact, they highlight that they are currently for justices who favor gun control and for justices who oppose gun control, they then explain and according to their ad, President Trump chose Brett Kavanaugh to break the tie. They urge your nomination, pointing out that the viewers access to guns depends on your vote, Justice Kavanaugh.  
      So you had mentioned earlier that the Supreme Court had in the past said, concealed weapons, guns in schools, machine guns could be banned, but you can provide that fifth vote to undo these earlier Supreme Court precedents. So why do you think so this is part of their ad, "Your right to self defense depends on this vote." This is based on it's part of the NRA million dollar campaign to get you onto the court. Why do you think the NRA is spending so much money to ensure that you get confirmed as a Supreme Court justice?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, a lot of ads for and against me, and I've seen quite a few  
HIRONO:  Well, I am asking specifically about the NRA ad. Why do they think you are going to provide the crucial fifth vote to they obviously think that you're on their page.  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, a lot of bad by groups, again stand for that is the right of people to express their views, I understand that. I, again stand for and I am an independent judge and I have for 12 years have had a record of being an independent judge.  
HIRONO:  Well, obviously, the NRA does not think you are so independent when it comes to gun legislation because they are spending a lot of money to tell everybody that you are going to provide that crucial vote to their liking. So, you know, I think these ads speak for themselves why they think you are the critical person to be on that court? I want to follow-up one more thing, something you told Senator Feinstein yesterday regarding your views on guns. You seem to indicate that your view as Supreme Court precedent is that a type of gun could not be banned, and I'll quote you here what you said yesterday, "If a type of firearm is widely owned in the United States." So did you mean to say widely owned, as opposed to widely used, in your response to Senator Feinstein?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think I referred to the dangerous and unusual test that the Supreme Court has articulated and referred to how I had applied that test in my Heller opinion.  
HIRONO:  Well, you did say that if a type of firearm is widely owned in the United States, you would deem any limitation on widely owned guns to be unconstitutional. So is it your view that if a large enough number of people download designs for 3D guns and printed them and therefore they own them, that the states and Federal government could not ban them, because now they are widely owned?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I cannot talk about a hypothetical case.  
HIRONO:  I think that is another reason that the NRA is so adamant that you get on the court. I'd like to cede the rest of my time to Senator Booker.  
LEAHY:  I understand, Senator Blumenthal, do you have a unanimous consent request to offer some documents?  
BLUMENTHAL:  I do. Thank you very much, Mister Chairman. I would like to enter several letters from outside organizations into the record. These organizations have voiced some of the real world consequences of Judge Kavanaugh's appointment. They come from the National Council of Jewish Women, the National Abortion Federation, various faith organizations and communities, the National Center For Transgender Equality, the Public Health Association and the Center for Public Representation. I ask that they be made a part of the record.  
LEAHY:  Without objection. This Chair recognizes Senator Sasse.  
SASSE:  Thank you, Mister Chairman. Judge, you're in the home stretch. Some of us are way beyond bedtime. I snuck out and did a good night call with my kids and my seven-year-old was so groggy. He asked what I was up to and I told him and he said, he was curious if you were scared of poisonous spiders. I will protect you from having to answer his question. Mike Lee already asked you about Sharpies, so we won't ask you about your phobias related to the outdoors.  
      I'd like to talk a little bit about the First Amendment. I am worried about the liberal project, in a grand sense, I think what is happening on campuses right now is really dangerous and I think what happens on campus will probably not stay on campus. We've got lots of data that shows high school kids don't know our history, don't know basic civics.  
      One of the most frightening numbers has been Americans under 35, 41% of them tell pollsters they think the First Amendment is dangerous because you might be able to use your free speech to say something that would hurt someone else's feelings. So I would love to explore a little bit where we are in the First Amendment.  
      So can we go to history, first. What is the core purpose of the First Amendment, why do we have it?  
KAVANAUGH:  We protect it so individuals can express their views in speech and in writing. The idea that there is no such thing as a true idea that's dictated from above by the government, and that individuals can say what they think in speech and in writing and help it's both an individual idea that they can express their own opinions and their own beliefs and it's also I think there is also an idea that truth develops through debate and more informed judgment, the more perfect union develops through debate when we have different perspectives that are shared and a lot of ideas began as unpopular ideas and then people they take hold over time.  
      And it is important to protect the ability of people to speak, both for their individual rights and for the idea of the betterment of society over time through debate and improvement of a more perfect union.  
SASSE:  Thanks. I am encouraged. I was hoping that we would hear both sides of that. We need First Amendment because it is required for individual liberty and we need it structurally because society, and particularly a Republic needs that discourse. Aristotle thought you never really have a great idea in what you think if it's just bouncing around inside your head. It needs to be dialogued with others and a free Republic and a free people need that debate advance in the structure of liberty.  
      Why are there five freedoms in the First Amendment? Why do we have speech, press, religion, assembly, protest, redress of grievances? Why wouldn't we have a different amendment for each one? Why isn't there just free speech and maybe the two clauses of religion, but why are they all together in an amendment? It is not supposed to be some grand "gotcha" question. I am actually just abusing you for private tutorial  
KAVANAUGH:  I think the rights when we they got to New York in 1789, James Madison, after going through the ratifying conventions and hearing, getting a lot of heat frankly for why isn't there protection in the Bill of Rights on something that George Mason and others who were concerned about with the original Constitution. So when he got to New York, he was busy working on this.  
      Right now, a draft of the rights that he thought should be protected in a Bill of Rights and drew on a lot of the states Constitutions and I talked with Senator Kennedy some of that and I don't have a clear answer for why the grouping ended up in that fashion.  
SASSE:  Well, is it fair to say that if we didn't have a First Amendment, would people not have these rights? Wasn't the Constitution completed without the Bill of Rights, because we don't think government gives us rights? We have rights because people are created by God with dignity and so the rights, they belong to people, because of the nature of humans. And humans are created in the image of God and they have dignity, and so the Constitution stops before the Bill of Rights and then, the Bill of Rights sort of clarifies a whole bunch of things that we believe about people.  
      And when you run through them, it is kind of amazing that we end at the 9th and 10th Amendment which in a way or the 9th and 10th Amendment, I want you to tell me what they mean, but if I am teaching it to my kids, what I say the 9th and 10th Amendment mean is, "Oh, you don't actually need a list that might end, because if think that you only have the rights that the government creates for you, then you might think where the government stops talking, you don't have any more rights." It seems to me what the 9th and 10th Amendment say, oh by the way, if we don't have a list of rights that continues, you still have all the ones we didn't name and state and local governments, if the Federal government hasn't said, this is the power uniquely enumerated for the Federal government, states and locals, you're the only governments that still have these remaining powers. Is that fair or correct me?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think one of the ideas at the convention, and they did talk a bit about Bill of Rights there or individual rights and they do have some in Article 1 Section 9 and Article 1 Section 10. We forget those rights. I hate to take it aside here, but I want to underscore that the ex post facto bill of attainder provisions are critical to individual liberty or ex post facto is the very definition of a tyrannical government when what you did yesterday is made illegal tomorrow and you are punished for what you did yesterday when it wasn't illegal then.  
      And so those were some of the foundational individual liberties, but the idea I think they had, and it was maybe a bit of a political miscalculation at the convention was because the Federal government was only given certain specified powers, we didn't need to put in a Bill of Rights, because the Federal government wouldn't have the power to do these kinds of things in the first place. Well, that didn't go over so great in some of the ratifying conventions and some of the promises that were made, were instead of amending the existing structure, let's get to work as soon as we get to New York in 1789 on a Bill of Rights, and there were a variety of discussions.  
      And that is what Madison did when they got there in 1789. So, I think your point is correct with respect to thinking about where rights come from. But I think in the practical politics of the day, the initial idea was the Federal government won't have the power to do that and then people said, what are you talking about? There's lots of powers in this Constitution. Even if you think that, that's felt and suspenders, and make sure that the Federal government can't infringe these core liberties, which are part of what we think are fundamental to being an American.  
SASSE:  Why isn't there an exemption written into the First Amendment against hate speech? What is hate speech and who gets to decide what it is?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I think the principle of free speech that the framers put into the Constitution encompassed the idea that there would be, as the Supreme Court has subsequently said in a variety of cases, unpopular ideas that would be expressed, and that, as we said earlier, it is important for individual liberty to have the ability to express your thoughts and words and it's important for societal development, the development of America for people to be able to express their ideas so that we can improve over time.  
      And a lot of the ideas we hold dear were unpopular, some of them not so long ago, and we've developed those ideas over time, in part, free speech helps us build a better America.  
SASSE:  Yes, if we had to unpack American political philosophy in one word, I think it is antimajoritarianism, and you never would want the majority to get to define what the minority can't hold in an unpopular position. Mr. Chairman is going to take my gavel take my microphone, but I would love to ask you if speech can ever be called violent.  
KAVANAUGH:  I will just add one sentence to the antimajoritarianism point, we think of individual liberties specified in the Constitution as supporting that, but the structure has made it clear, the structure, the separation of powers and Federalism is part of that same overall idea which is protection of individual liberty against majoritarian rule and the whole document tilts toward liberty.  
LEAHY:  Senator Booker?  
BOOKER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Judge, you don't need to answer this, because we all know your answer anyways, but will you allow me to ask a series of questions leading to a question that I don't know your answer to. And the simple question, again, we don't know your heart, but just a question so I can lead some place, you would not fire somebody because of the color of their skin, obviously, no, right? You wouldn't fire somebody? I just want you to say no to that, please.  
KAVANAUGH:  No, I have been clear  
BOOKER:  You have been clear, because you have hired interns. You've talked to me about friends. I know that's the case, and believe me, I am not questioning that. So you would not fire somebody because of their gender, obviously, right?  
KAVANAUGH:  So I've made clear my efforts to achieve, as best I can, in the ways I can, as a judge  
BOOKER:  And so just because of my time, I heard about numerous of my colleagues and even on the other side of the aisle, asked me to go through your hiring, and I just know that is your heart, and I'm not challenging that, I'm not asking that, I'm just trying to lead someplace, if you will allow me. So you know it would be wrong for someone else to fire somebody just because of the color of their skin? Right? Morally wrong, right?  
KAVANAUGH:   of course  
BOOKER:  It would be morally wrong.  
KAVANAUGH:  The Civil Rights laws  
BOOKER:  Can I ask you just person-to-person, human being to human being, the dignity of a human being, it would be wrong to fire somebody because of the color of their skin?  
KAVANAUGH:  And I understand that, I think my record, it clearly states it echoes that.  
BOOKER:  As I have stated numerous times, I am not challenging that at all. Would it be wrong to fire somebody if the person said, "Hey, I just found out that this person is gay?" Would it be wrong to fire that person?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, in my workplace, I hire people because of their talent and abilities. All Americans  
BOOKER:  So maybe I can shift in morally, you think it is right to hire people, it doesn't matter their background. For someone to fire someone, just because they are gay, then we will shift to the law now, do they have a legal right to fire somebody just they are gay in your opinion?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, the question, as I am sure you are aware of the scope of employment discrimination law is being litigated right now. And therefore, why I would like to talk about this more, because that issue is in a variety of cases right now, it would be inconsistent, as I am sure you're going to  
BOOKER:  Right, and I guess my Senator Harris, Senator Coons all brought up these issues, Loving v. Virginia has been mentioned, the Obergefell case has been mentioned, and I think that there's a lot of folks who have real concerns that if you get on the court, folks who are married right now really have a fear that they will not be able to continue those marital bonds and we still have a country where if you post your Facebook pictures up of your marriage, someone of the same-sex, we still have a majority of states where that employer of yours finds out that you had a gay marriage and that you're gay, in a majority of American states, you can fire somebody because they are gay. And I guess, you're not willing to tell me whether you personally, morally, now think if that it is right or wrong.  
KAVANAUGH:  So, Senator, I am a judge and therefore, with the cases that you are well aware of, I know pending in the courts about the scope of the Civil Rights laws, the employment discrimination laws, of course, Congress could always make those clear  
BOOKER:  I just that's what I want to get to that point, that you won't give me a moral answer because of the pending cases and I've heard that  
KAVANAUGH:  Right, and I don't want to, in any way  
BOOKER:  So maybe I can ask you about your concern when you were in the Bush White House, did you have any involvement in Bush's effort to support a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, when I was in the White House, that was part of something that he talked about. Of course, at that point in time  
BOOKER:  Did you express an opinion about it then yourself?  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, as staff secretary, things related to the speeches he gave would have crossed my desk as I've discussed before  
BOOKER:  I am not privy to your documents at that time, did you ever express your opinions did you ever express your opinions about same-sex marriage? In these documents that I don't know, I'll be happy if one day they will come out.  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't recall. Of course at that time, as you're well aware, senator, there's been a sea change in attitude in the United States of America, even since 2004 as you're well aware  
BOOKER:  But you are not willing to tell me, if I asked you then, and again, you could change. I mean, we had President Obama evolve on that issue, and so will you tell me your attitude then about it?  
KAVANAUGH:  I will tell you that there was debate in the White House. Vice President Cheney came out, one of the few times he came out and publicly disagreed with  
BOOKER:  I don't need to know what Cheney's opinions, what are your opinions on the issue?  
KAVANAUGH:  I am sorry, Senator, I didn't mean to interrupt. But there was debate in the White House about what President Bush was doing, of course, as you said, President Obama   
BOOKER:  That was his word, evolved on the issue, but your opinion, I don't need Obama or Cheney, just will you express to me your opinion on same-sex marriage.  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't recall  
BOOKER:  I am not asking your opinion Then. I am asking your opinion now. Do you recall your opinion now on same sex marriage?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, the Supreme Court in Obergefell  
BOOKER:  Well, your opinion. I don't know, maybe I didn't get the record. I don't know if you've conducted gay marriages, I don't know if you've been to gay marriages, what is your opinion?  
KAVANAUGH:  I am a judge. I apply the law.  
BOOKER:  Have you conducted a gay marriage?  
KAVANAUGH:  Have I conducted one?  
BOOKER:  Presided over one? Officiated a gay marriage?  
KAVANAUGH:  I have not.  
BOOKER:  OK, but you don't want to tell me your opinion on that issue.  
KAVANAUGH:  I apply the law. The law of the Supreme Court  
BOOKER:  So we can go back, I want to move on as quickly as I can.  
KAVANAUGH:  The law of the land protects that right as dictated by the Supreme Court.  
BOOKER:  Sir, if I can just turn really quickly to your views on the criminal justice system. A lot of my colleagues who heard the speech last summer at a conservative think tank, you called Chief Justice Rehnquist, and I quote, "Your first judicial hero." Rehnquist was one of the most conservative justices, but you said, quote, about him, "Rehnquist fervently believed that the Supreme Court had taken a wrong turn in the '60s and '70s, when the court made a lot of really landmark decisions." Whether Gideon v. Wainwright, about access to an attorney; you had the assurance that police officers can't violate your constitutional rights and then turn around and use that improperly to gain information.  
      The exclusionary rule. The requirement that police officers taking you into custody that they give your Miranda Rights. You praised Rehnquist's efforts to limit and halt, that's your quote, "halt" needs and critical protections. You said that it quote, "widened the shift of constitutional jurisprudence." So do you think he took a wrong turn? That we had taken a wrong turn by establishing those rights?  
KAVANAUGH:  That is not what I said, Senator. The fact that we haven't discussed exclusionary rule in Miranda over the last 24 hours is a sign of success of Chief Justice Rehnquist in helping the Supreme Court achieve a middle ground that has endured that has endured and it's not really  
BOOKER:  Well, I think we haven't discussed it at least, I haven't had a chance to ask you about it yet and my time is running out, so just like tell me if any of these were wrong turns? The exclusionary rule a wrong turn or not?  
KAVANAUGH:  Supreme Court  
BOOKER:  Your opinion, exclusionary rule, wrong turn or not? Is that settled?  
KAVANAUGH:  I apply the precedent  
BOOKER:  You can't tell me if it is settled. What about the Miranda warnings, settled or not?  
KAVANAUGH:  The court can I get two  
BOOKER:  No, unless you tell me your opinion. I know what the precedent is, I know this law very well.  
LEAHY:  And I think the witness is entitled to answer the question  
      
BOOKER:  Sir, he's been allowed six minutes at the end of my one time I know he's going to get a chance to answer my questions, I am just trying to get them all out so when he has six or seven minutes at the end. You said, Rehnquist made our criminal laws more workable, but the question really is, this is quote from you sir  
      
BOOKER:  Criminal law, I think, criminal laws maybe criminal law in general, I have a real question about workable for who? And you understand the disparities in our criminal justice system.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes.  
BOOKER:  You understand that we have all the data shows that people, based upon their financial status, based upon the color of their skin, often have different experiences in the law. Do you understand that?  
KAVANAUGH:  Absolutely.  
BOOKER:  Yes, you know that. I know you know that.  
KAVANAUGH:  We've talked about that.  
BOOKER:  Yes, Brian Stevenson says we have a criminal justice system that treats you better if you are rich and guilty than poor and innocent. We have a real issue with that. You and I had discussed this.  
KAVANAUGH:  Yes, in conversation.  
BOOKER:  I appreciated that, and I've got two minutes left for this conversation, so let me just, really quickly get this out because I am going then let you respond. And that is the challenge for a lot of Americans right now, which is they really believe that the scales are different. We have a system now where we don't even really have jury trials in criminal cases anymore. That was something that is very fundamental for our criminal justice system is the jury trial. But the scales have shifted so much that you see now, in fact, there's a great book, which I don't know if the Senators would be given a book, I would have given you a number I will  
KAVANAUGH:  Happy to get them.  
BOOKER:  I am going to give a recommendations, and I will give you a new Jim Crow by Michelle Alexander.  
KAVANAUGH:  I clerked with Michelle Alexander.  
BOOKER:  I am grateful to give you these books, but let's keep going on because you're doing a good job of getting me for allowing me not to get to my questions and I've got a very, very diligent Chairman that is going to cut me off in one minute in ten seconds, so you know right now that we have a system that seems to be shifting away, why innocent people plead guilty is another book that is worthy of reading because of criminal defendants and the power shifting.  
      And so that's what raises that question to me about the rights of criminal defendants, and it seems to be that you're indicating that you are in favor of what Rehnquist said that those rights of criminal defendants somehow got out of control, that they are making it more workable, and the question I have, is workable for who? And it seems when I look a lot of these issues, as a guy, you and I both have talked you talked about a lot in New York City, the violence. I was a mayor of a big city, every single day, working to try to keep my city safer, so I know about public safety, as you do.  
      And I believe that these systems, these laws are making us less safe. They are destroying communities because at Yale, they weren't stopping and frisking kids on the way home from parties at The Toad, looking for drugs. They weren't getting the same treatment, those kids, and there was a lot of drug use at Yale.  
      And so, I hear you saying, you're praising Rehnquist who was making these laws more workable, and I just asked you workable for who?  
LEAHY:  Judge, do you want to answer any of those questions.  
KAVANAUGH:  I'll try to give about a minute on this I understand, we had a great conservation about racial disparities in the criminal justice system and we talked about ensuring confidence of all Americans in the fairness of the criminal justice system and the American legal system and the court system and the Supreme Court and I appreciated that conversation.  
      I would just note four things. The note I wrote in law school about detecting race discrimination in Batson hearings, my opinions on acquitted conduct that have been used to enhance sentence and my opinions of is often unfair when acquitted conduct is used to jack up sentences far beyond what the offense of conviction would be. Third, my opinion on the mens rea in the Burwell case, I strongly would encourage that you take a look at that because that is part of the fairness and due process.  
      OK, so I understand your perspective and I enjoyed our conversation and thank you for that.  
BOOKER:  And if I can get the same treatment that Senator Blumenthal got, I'd like to can I just thank you very much, sir, thank you very much, sir. Mr. Chairman, I am holding a number of letters in opposition to the nomination of Judge Brett Kavanaugh to be associate judge. They are letters from the NAACP, multiple health care groups around the country, Voto Latino, the Women Lawyers Guard, there's a number of very esteemed religious organizations and churches representations here, the Congressional Black Caucus and others. I'd like to submit those in the records, and just an honor of Mr. Sasse because I have a tremendous respect for him and I actually agree with a lot of what he was saying about free thought and what is happening in this country, I just want to ask the person, a friendly question, that I would love to read any book he has to recommend if he read any book if the Judge would read any book I would recommend. I make that offer in all just an extension of good faith.  
LEAHY:  Without objection, this will be made part of the record. For the record, Senator Durbin is one of the most prolific book recommenders. I benefited greatly from his recommendations of fiction and non-fiction alike, and so I will just suggest that I recommend we go back to Senator Durbin.  
BOOKER:  Senator, I would to do a book exchange with you, sirs. Maybe that can help  
LEAHY:  We will start with this one.  
BOOKER:  Oh, god, please don't do that. In that case, I will just put in the record, I retract my that's pretty thick.  
LEAHY:  We will go to Senator Flake.  
FLAKE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you judge, I appreciate your endurance. I know you've done an Austin marathon twice, how does this compare?  
KAVANAUGH:  I feel good, Senator.  
FLAKE:  Senator Booker represented heartbreak hill, I think, so you are beyond that and on the way down, now. I just want to make a couple of comments, and I will yield additional time to Senator Lee. Cameras in the courtroom, I know you addressed it a little before. I raised it during the course that you're here. I am very much opposed to it. Not here, I am glad there are cameras here. They belong here. This is the Congress. This is the Senate. They belong here and the protest here of people's right to free speech and the country needs to see that.  
      But I fear that it would politicize and be detrimental to the independence of the judiciary. I am glad that cameras have been resisted in the oral arguments. I know you can't comment or won't comment on this. And if you want to, you can. But I certainly don't think that it is in our interest to bring the element of politics any closer to the judiciary.  
      So I will make the same comments that I did with Justice Gorsuch's hearing. I did chair a subcommittee hearing on the use of technology in the courtroom last summer. I've had a long interest in the topic and I remained convinced after the testimony that we received there and what I've observed that we are better off having oral arguments the way they have been and the court has remained and I hope will continue to remain a bastion of independence. That is more difficult if there are cameras in the courtroom. So with that, I'll yield my remaining time to Senator Lee as he might use it.  
LEAHY:  Thank you, Senator Flake, we will go to Senator Harris and then come back to Senator Lee. Can I just ask that Senator Booker raised some issue about the reduction in the number of jury trials in criminal cases, I don't know what particularly  
KAVANAUGH:  Probably plea-bargaining.  
LEAHY:  Oh is that because of plea-bargains?  
BOOKER:  Yes, sir. The percentage of jury trials in this country has gone down dramatically  
LEAHY:  Because of plea bargains, OK, not because people are being denied  
BOOKER:  I would say plea bargains, I would say plea bargains are the result of mandatory minimum sentences which have changed pretty dramatically.  
LEAHY:  OK, thank you for that explanation. Senator Harris.  
HARRIS:  Thank you, Judge, you've spoken about the President's unlimited prosecutorial discretion, does that discretion allow him to target his political enemies for prosecution and spare his friends?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, in the Marquette speech I gave in 2015, I've pointed out that the question of the limits of prosecutorial discretion, is a question that unsettled and needs further study. The Supreme Court of course has referred to the concept in well settled tradition of prosecutorial discretion in Heckler v. Chaney and Nixon  
HARRIS:  Can I actually recall you talking about that during the course of this hearing, and also, I am reflecting on a conversation you had with Senator Flake yesterday, where he raised concerns with you about a recent tweet by the President. In that tweet, the President attacked the Justice Department for indicting two Republican members of Congress because it would hurt the Republican Party at the polls. You said you didn't want to assess comments in the political arena, so I want to ask you to condemn the tweet, even I believe you should, but would you recognize and agree with the principle that a sitting President should not politicize the Justice Department?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I think that is asking me to wade into the political arena and  
HARRIS:  That's not a self-evident  
KAVANAUGH:  Three zip codes away from the political arena, Senator.  
HARRIS:  Following up on Senator Booker's question from yesterday on an interview you gave in 1999 in connection with the case you worked on, you said that it was an inevitable conclusion within the next 10 or 20 years that if the court would say quote, "We are all one race in the eyes of the government." Would you agree that your statement suggests that the government would no longer recognize racial differences? That's my reading of your words and is that in the zone of what you intended?  
KAVANAUGH:  So, I think I talked to Senator Booker about that yesterday. It's truly an aspirational suggestion but I have said this recently as a couple of years ago that the long march for racial equality is not finished and racial discrimination is still a reality we see on an all too frequent basis and I've said that in my opinions  
HARRIS:  Yes, and so I am going to the conclusion I draw from that is that, you would and I certainly believe we have not arrived at that place yet.  
KAVANAUGH:  There is still racial disparity and racial discrimination, of course in American society. I've said that in my opinions.  
HARRIS:  But my question is this, why should it be up to the court to decide when we arrive, whenever that moment comes? Why should it be up to the court to decide?  
      KAVANAUGH; I think that is a question of how to interpret the precedent of the Supreme Court and it's not a it's different areas as we've discussed. There's precedent in the higher education context, there's precedent in the contracting context in terms  
HARRIS:  Does that precedent dictate that it would be the court that would make the decision that we have arrived to that place where we are basically all one race in the eyes of the government?  
KAVANAUGH:  The precedent doesn't necessarily lead to that conclusion. I think that's an open question going forward. You're familiar with Justice O'Connor's statement in the Michigan case about 25 years and that clock is moving fast. But we still have, as I have said in my opinions, work to do.  
HARRIS:  So, I have just a few minutes left, but just to continue this conversation, if it were up to the court to decide, just taking again to the natural conclusion that the comment or what you wrote, will it be the five justices now of the court who will decide or are you suggesting that it should be like Brown v. Board of Education where there would be a unanimous decision that we've arrived at that point or could it simply be five justices, a majority of the court deciding that we've arrived at that point?  
KAVANAUGH:  I think a one-size-fits-all answer to the question is hard to give in this context.  
HARRIS:  But do you imagine this being the ideal?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, the ideal for every case is that every case is unanimous. But I realize that is naive, but that is the goal that when I talk about joining a team of nine, and that's the goal and I think that's the goal of every justice. And the court has shown a remarkable ability for the most important cases in its history, like Brown v. Board of Education, like United States v. Richard Nixon, to achieve unanimity and that's part of the reason those cases stand as such landmarks. The decision, the independence, and the unanimity.  
HARRIS:  And you and I have discussed that before and you mention that here, I agree with that, but tell me, when the court does make that decision if that moment arise, that we are one race, does that mean the government should not provide Federal funding to historically black colleges and universities?  
KAVANAUGH:  Senator, I think the historically black colleges and universities have of course been a critical part of the educational system of the United States.  
HARRIS:  And we recognize past restrictions on African-American students being able to have access to higher education, but do you imagine though that if we reach this point, that you I think hope that we will achieve, I think we all do that we will all be equal in every way, do you believe that that would mean then that we would end Federal funding for HBCUs?  
KAVANAUGH:  Again, Senator, when we reach that point, it is hard to foresee what that would mean, but what I know about historically black colleges and universities is of course, the origins of them. That African-Americans were denied access to higher educational institutions. What they have accomplished and produced and are continuing what they continue to do, and the importance of those colleges and universities in the United States, they continue to perform that educational function.  
HARRIS:  Thank you. And how would the courts and agencies enforce laws like the Civil Rights Act of 1964 if the government does not recognize racial categories? I am not clear about how what you're imagining would occur.  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, that is a question of what Congress has as the law. So long as Congress and of course, a landmark Civil Rights Law, the Voting Rights Act, one of those two, 64 and 65 two of the most consequential laws ever passed by Congress, to ban discrimination on the base of race and so long as those laws are on the books, and one imagines those laws will always been on the books, discrimination on the basis of race will be illegal under the Civil Rights laws and the voting rights laws in what they carve.  
HARRIS:  So, what would become of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 in that place that you imagined, at least in 1999 where we'd arrived in 10 to 20 years from then, where we are all one race in the eyes of the government. What would that mean for the Civil Rights Act of 1964 because I am assuming that if you are actually confirmed, you will live a long life, as I hope all of us do.  
      And so, it is conceivable that during the course of your lifetime, conceivable, I don't know if it's probable but conceivable that we will arrive at that place. So imagining that and imagining that you will be still a member of the United States Supreme Court. What do you imagine would be your analysis as it relates to the applicability and relevance of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 if we arrive at that place that you describe?  
KAVANAUGH:  Well, I think those might be two distinct issues, and I think so long which one imagines it will always be on the books, the Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of race in employment, housing and voting, so long as those are on the books, those will continue to be enforced by the Federal courts and that discrimination on the basis of race would be something that will unlawful and illegal.  
HARRIS:  Thank you, my time is up. I appreciate it.  
KAVANAUGH:  Thank you, Senator.  
HARRIS:  And then, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to also introduce letters into the record. I have first a letter from several of our nation's leading Civil Rights organizations, signed by the leaders of the National Coalition of Black Civic Participation, the Lawyers Committee For Civil Rights, NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, the NAACP, the National Urban League and the National Action Network, all critical of this nomination and expressing concerns.  
      Second, I have a letter from 31 reproductive rights, health and justice organizations including Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Mayrell and the Women's Law Center and finally, I have letters from the Feminist Majority Foundation, the Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund, the American Network of Community Options and Resources and the National Center for Special Education. Thank you.  
LEAHY:  That will be made part of record without objection, Senator Tillis.  
TILLIS:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am going to be real brief. One, I thought Senator Booker did a very artful job of going down the path of questions that you could answer yes or no to in terms of who you would hire and who you would fire. So let me just make sure that I am also clear on something you can't respond to. But quite honestly, firing someone because of their gender identification is immoral. It is also something that if anybody even suggested it, it's never worked in my organization, they'd get fired before the sunset.  
      I've been passionate about this issue since 1997 when I set up a gay and lesbian recruiting practice at Price Waterhouse. That is becoming the norm. It's on us to fix it. It's not on the judge to determine how we are going to get it done. And as for HBCU, I am also proud to have led the HB the first HBCU recruiting practice at Price Waterhouse. It's critically important. Again, if it becomes under threat under the law, then let's do our job and fix it. Last thing for you, now you get to ask a question or answer a question. Judge Kavanaugh, there are about 350 lawyers at the Kasowitz firm, is that right?  
KAVANAUGH:  I don't know the number.  
TILLIS:  I think that is right based on what we've found in looking up the firm, but do you know all of them?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
TILLIS:  Are there any that you do know?  
KAVANAUGH:  I know Ed McNally, he used to work in the White House Counsel's Office when I was in the White House.  
TILLIS:  Have you ever talked with him about the Mueller investigation?  
KAVANAUGH:  No.  
TILLIS:  Do you know anyone else who works at the firm?  
KAVANAUGH:  Not that I am aware of.  
TILLIS:  Thank you. I again appreciate it. It gives me one more chance to thank your family and all of your friends and all these folks here are probably going to have to go get back massages. Thank you all and God bless you. I look forward to supporting your nomination.  
LEAHY:  Let me close and give the committee the agenda for tomorrow, and then will go to our closed session. Judge, I am very pleased that the American people have finally had an opportunity to listen to you and to hear directly from you, because that is what these last two days have been all about. And I hope a lot of people in this country have formed very positive views of you, as I have. It seems to me that you made a powerful and convincing case for Senate confirmation. Hours and hours of questioning and your answers have been compelling and credible.  
      Your 12 years of judicial experience on the most important Federal circuit court in America; 10,000 pages of judicial writings, I think proves that unquestionably you're qualified to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States.  
      And we also ought to be very impressed with you as a person, a lifetime of public service. In addition to serving as an outstanding judge, you have been a professor, a coach, a volunteer, and probably most importantly, and I think you would see your position as a husband and a dad is the most important thing in your life.  
      Tomorrow is the fourth and final day of this hearing. We will have four panels. On the first panel, we will hear from two witnesses from the American Bar Association and, of course, everybody knows that Democratic leaders have called their judgment of somebody a gold standard of judicial evaluations, and they have rated you well unanimously well-qualified to serve on the Supreme Court. We will then have three more panels after the ABA panel where we will hear from 26 additional witnesses, 13 from the majority, 13 from the minority. Many of these witnesses include Judge Kavanaugh's former law clerks, students, friends and associates. I look forward from hearing about their personal bonds with you, Judge.  
      Now, without objection from the Committee members and Judge Kavanaugh, we will move into closed session in Dirksen 226.  
      This session is adjourned.  
